Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA16044; Wed, 15 Jan 97 19:20:21 EST
Received: from MARINARA.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA03827; Wed, 15 Jan 97 19:20:09 EST
From: nemesis@MIT.EDU
Received: by marinara.MIT.EDU (5.57/4.7) id AA13069; Wed, 15 Jan 97 19:20:05 -0500
Message-Id: <9701160020.AA13069@marinara.MIT.EDU>
Cc: janheis@MIT.EDU, brgarcia@MIT.EDU, jhull@MIT.EDU, dljackso@MIT.EDU,
        martha@MIT.EDU, dellacqu@ohso.edu, rdanos@wellesley.edu
Subject: MITOC Winter school Hikes:  Stimson/Kinsman 1/11-1/12
Date: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 19:20:03 EST

Personnel:  Ted Allison, Cashman Andrus, Joe Budman, Matthew Debski,
            Janis Eisenberg, Scott Fitzgerald, Bryan Garcia, Jesse Hull,
            David Jackson, Carl Kim, Martha Montague, Meg Muckenhoupt, 
            Joshua Napoli, Jim Reardon, Scott Stuart

Synopsis:  A large MITOC group enjoyed what turned out to be two winter
           day hikes in excellent hiking conditions. 

We left MIT on Friday evening under clear skies and were soon stuck fast
in the middle of the longest traffic jam most of us had ever been in.
Two of the cars had left an hour before the third and therefore nine
people enjoyed an hour of stargazing at Camelot following the 7 hour
drive to get there before the third car arrived with the key.  This was
the only stargazing that was done during the weekend because the SEDS
contingent allowed themselves to be discouraged from coming with their
telescopes by an unfavorable weather forecast.  The lone SEDS representative
was Ted Allison, who deserved commendation first for not being discouraged
by the forecast and second for staying up until dawn tending the Camelot
wood stove, which would not stay lit due to sappy wood.

Under threat of mutiny the wake-up time was moved up to 11:00 am, and after
a leisurely 'breakfast' we climbed Stimson Mtn.  This is a 2 mile (perhaps
a little longer?) hike with 1400 ft of elevation gain, 20 minutes by car
from Camelot.  We hiked through about 6 inches of very light powder in
25 F weather.  There is a fine view at the top (when the snow melts you
can also inspect along the trail the remains of the houses of the farmers
of previous generations who tilled the fields of Stimson Mtn. during the
era when most of New Hampshire was clear-cut).
             
For some reason we made it back to the cars before dark and returned to 
Camelot.  At this time Scott and Meg took it upon themselves to supervise
the cooking of dinner for the group for which they deserve not only thanks
but also astonishment.  Outside the cabin the night was 10 degrees F, clear,
and calm.

It was still 10 F, clear, and calm, and also still night, when we awoke at
6 am the next morning for an attempt on North Kinsman.  The group of us
started hiking up the Lonesome Lake trail at 10 am.  The clouds above us
were whipping from West to East, and the wind on the road was gusting
from East to West, but there was little wind in the woods where we
were hiking.  After a little over an hour of steady climbing along a
well-broken trail through perhaps a foot of light powder we arrived at
the Lake itself, which we walked directly across.  A quick lunch at the
hut on the other shore, which was closed and shut tight, and then we
were ready for the climb to the top via the Fishin' Jimmy Trail.  The 
bands of blue which had come and gone through the morning had by now 
disappeared and we found that we were walking through light snow in very 
still air.  We paused halfway to the top to put on crampons; the ice axes 
and crampons which we carried were certainly useful but not strictly 
necessary.  We arrived at the Kinsman Ridge trail at 2 pm; it was not
broken out, and there were snowdrifts along it which made the going
slower.  Nonetheless we arrived at the top at 2:30.  

Going down was much more enjoyable than coming up, the snow conditions
being perfect for sliding or 'skiing' around the steep bends on the
upper section of the trail.  Unaccountably we once again arrived at the
cars just before dark, and set off for Boston.  

Thanks to Cashman Andrus, Scott Fitzgerald, and Jesse Hull for driving.
And thanks to everyone who came--this is among the most successful of the
large winter school hikes I have been on.

Jim Reardon






































