From: "Margaret Muckenhoupt" <megm@post.harvard.edu>
Subject: Trip Report- Quincy Bog
Date: Wed, 21 Jun 2000 10:28:06 -0400


Trip Report:  Quincy Bog

For years, we had passed the signs on the way to Camelot Cabin, the
little, brown, frustrating signs of a place we had never been, we had
never seen; a place that tempted us, that frightened us, that promised
unparalleled adventure, peril, and glee.  The day we got stuck on top
of Mt. Washington (June 17 - 70 mph winds, heavy rain, 50 degrees F),
we resolved that we would leave the visitor center via the cog railway
- AND that we would show our mettle, test our resolve - that we would
show that we, too, could master our environment - that we could not be
stopped, slowed, or even slightly annoyed by the great, the terrible,
the very wet Quincy Bog.

At 10 am on Sunday, June 18, we began our descent into the bog.
Outfitted only in boots, long pants, jackets, and headnets, we plunged
down towards the visitor center, where we found the mailbox of trail
pamphlets CLOSED.  Old Uncle Quincy Bog was trying to prevent us from
discovering his secrets - but we were determined!  With ferocity and
strength, I gripped the door of the mailbox, and wrenched it open.
Inside, we found about 20 copies of "The Joe Kent Ecological Trail at
Quincy Bog, revised 2000 edition." We had gained the key to the bog.
Now, our work began.

We had thwarted the closed mailbox, but Grandpa Quincy bog had more
tricks up his boggy sleeves.  Immediately after closing the mailbox,
we noticed the Swarm, the mosquitoes that followed us the entire trip.
There were so many of the, it was like walking through soup - a soup
made entirely of mosquitoes.  Of course, we were wearing headnets, so
we pretty much ignored them, but there was more to come!

Upon leaving the cabin, Second-Cousin-Once-Removed Quincy bog began
throwing numbers in our path - little, tiny blue numbers, keyed to the
Trail book.  We began confronting canada mayflowers, ladies' slippers,
cinnamon ferns, interrupted ferns, partridegeberries, bunchberries,
golden thread, sedges - hundreds, if not thousands of plants, grew
directly next to our path.  Even worse, we had seen these plants
before.  On all of our hikes in the White Mountains, we had seen
that-little-plant-that-looks-kinda-like-dogwood,
that-thing-with-little-red-berries-I-wonder-if-they're-edible and now,
here they were with names!  Facts!  Information poured onto us, like a
torrent of ones and zeroes!  We gasped as we struggled across the flat
, even path, desperately working to contain the data that surrounded,
blocking out very minds!

The trail continued through Maternal-Stepfather's-Brother-in-Law
Quincy's ever mor infernal selection of plants - club mosses, black
cherries, yellow birches, beeches, hemlocks and firs.  Only the
coraking frogs reminded us that somewhere, still, on this planet, some
animal life existed (by now we were convinced that the mosquitoes were
evil robots).  We frightened a blue heron while rounding a corner -
thank god!  Life survives!  Even the great orange shelf-fungus could
not deter us now.  I gazed out at the blue flag iris, and snickered in
contempt.

By now, Common-law-spouse's-adoptive-daughter's-husband Quincy was
pretty much poohed out.  It had only one more trick; as I crossed the
beaver-dam bridge, some great magnetic boggy force reached out and
pulled my guide pamphlet into the water, making it quite wet.  The
Great Blue Heron stared silently at my impotent moistness.  We were
tired after our long journey, and did not even bother looking for the
Rattlesnake Plantain - though a fat garter snake slithered out of our
path as we trudged back to the parking lot.  After we had reached the
car, slammed the doors shut, and scanned for mosquitoes clinging to
the ceiling of our dear, loyal Honda Civic, I checked my watch.  We
had traveled one mile, in two hours.  We had conquered Quincy Bog.

Meg Muckenhoupt


