From: Andre Girerd <agirerd@draper.com>
Subject: The Waterville-Sandwich Big Munch
Date: Mon, 19 Jun 2000 20:41:15 -0400

Trip Report: Waterville-Sandwich Big Munch

Andre' R. Girerd, Robert Jagnow

46.8 miles/11620 ft elevation gain in under 24 hrs, double
marathon/13770 ft gain in under 30 hrs June 4, 2000

      When in the course of human history the members of a small
cartel jointly experience an insatiable group desire, there often
ensues regimes of tyranny, oligarchic oppression, violent revolution,
or a vigorous expansion of doctrine.  For the two person hiking
alliance of Rob Jagnow and I, our mutual aspiration merely led to the
overthrow of that mythic entity known as the Waterville-Sandwich Big
Munch, or Momma Big Munch.  This jealous creature, mountainous in form
and thunderous in temper, guarded her circuitous circumnavigation
route with such aplomb that were it not for the tincture of madness
that infected our party, we might have concluded rationally that the
"coup de montagne" was impossible.  Yet in the advanced stage of
backcountry affliction that us beriddles, the impossible becomes
worthy of consideration, and the unlikely morphs into a downright
certainty.

      The Waterville-Sandwich Big Munch consists of a hodgepodge of
trails slapdashed together to provide all seven of the official 4000
ft peaks in the Sandwich Range and Waterville Ski region a decent
chance of being conquered in a day.  The seven mountains are Tecumseh,
Osceola, East Osceola, North Tripyramid, Middle Tripyramid,
Passaconaway, and Whiteface.  These represent the southernmost group
of 4000 footers in the White Mountains.  Unfortunately for
ridge-mongers, Tecumseh and the Osceolas (themselves not connected by
a ridge) are in an entirely different mountain range than the rest of
the peaks, which guarantees any attempt at climbing all seven to
encounter some serious elevation gain (at least 10,000 ft).  In
addition to elevation gain, the summits are also somewhat
geographically separated (unlike Franconia Ridge, for example) which
effectively enforces a lengthy tab of mileage.

      After spending quite a bit of time scouring Eastern Mountain
Sports, Wilderness House, and REI for any gear that might possibly
shave a few minutes off our hiking time, Rob and I escaped the
metropolis Saturday evening and pitched a tent in the Waterville
Campground at the very base of Mt. Tecumseh.  This time we both had
weight-saving zip-transformable nylon pant-shorts, hydration systems,
a bevy of bergelene, lightweight backup LED lights called photon or
pulsar depending on the manufacturer, and an experimental supply of
some strange substance known as caffeinated power gel.  I had figured
that the camelbak hydration system alone would dispense with at least
30 minutes of needless old-fashioned waterbottle breaks over the
course of the day.  We were anxious to test out the gear and separate
the wheat from the chaff.

      At 2:30AM Sunday we arose, and unbeknownst to us at the time,
Momma Big Munch had just received the first glimmer of foreboding that
her days of being unconquered were soon to end.  Incredulous still,
she didn't feel the need to pelt us with extreme temperatures so
early.  The morning was cold, but bergelene long underwear, hefty
adrenaline, and a gut-stuffing Concord NH Foodees dinner of pizza (for
Rob) and the "woodsman"-weird turkey on pasta (for me) made the
environment seem like nary a goosebump.  So at 3:11AM, under a new
moon, we left our car and started jogging up the ski-road to the
Mt. Tecumseh trailhead two miles away.  One hour and 35 minutes later
we stood at the top of Tecumseh, where it was already getting light,
having hiked 4.5 miles and gained 2540 ft of elevation.  This was
really a shot in the arm for our morale, even though the summit itself
was rather occluded by trees and thus quite mediocre, since the AMC
guidebook estimated the time to climb Tecumseh from the trailhead to
be 2 hrs and 20 minutes, and did not include the extra two miles from
the campsite.  Of course, we realized that if we relied on the AMC
times as a pacer, the whole loop would take something like 40 hours to
complete, so we could not afford to be complacent.  For pacing, we
relied on a spreadsheet of the upcoming trail junctions with mileages,
elevations and desired leg times all pre-calculated, which, in its
silent text form, was more authoritarian than the strictest martinet.

      Leaving the Tecumseh summit, we doubled back to the trailhead on
the ski road and took it partway down to its intersection with the
gravely Tripoli Road, which led us to the start of the Mt. Osceola
Trail.  Clambering up the slopes with one brief food-replenishment
stop and one blistoid-repair break (I say "blistoid" because Rob was
adamant that his manly constitution didn't allow him to get
"blisters") we reached the summit of Mt. Osceola at 8:18 AM, having
hiked 14.4 miles with 5270 ft of elevation gain.  Here the summit
allowed one of the day's better views, with a mildly exposed top and
an arrangement of strange "stonehenge" stones that must have been the
remnants of some long dismantled observation hut.  Then we charged on
to East Osceola, along which we spotted an exposed rock face of
obvious potential interest to technical rock climbers.  After
descending the steep trail from the Osceolas, we took the relatively
flat Greely Ponds Trails to the Livermore Trail, which we followed to
its intersection with the Scaur Ridge Trail, the gateway to the
Sandwich Range Wilderness.

      At this point (12:16 PM) we had traveled 24.2 miles with 6520 ft
of elevation gain at an average speed of 2.66 miles per hour.  Momma
Big Munch had already begun to feel her first pangs of fear, and had
reacted with the first of her direct-intervention hazards, sending out
swarms of black flies in an attempt to eat us to death.  But this had
only made us hike faster, in an effort to outpace the flies, so she
settled upon another strategy.  Now admittedly this second hurdle was
rather weak, and only amounted to vast mounds of animal droppings
littering the trail (as if that would stop us, oh no!)  But by the
time we had reached North Tripyramid (lame view) and Middle Tripyramid
(decent view) she decided to up the ante slightly.  At this point she
unleashed the rain.

      Now Momma Big Munch must be a passive-aggressive sort, since she
didn't come all-out and wash us down the mountain with a one-shot
monsoon deluge of nor'easter proportions.  No, she decided to drizzle
a little bit (but just enough to convince us to pull out the
gore-tex), then stop, (are we done with the jackets?) then recommence
(rats, more rain) all in an effort to soak us internally with our own
perspiration, since the trail itself was still relatively dry,
afforded decent traction, and allowed fast walking.  However, being
the insipid entity that she was, she slyly lowered the temperature
over each cycle until it became quite cold.

      We had made it to the Rollins Trail Junction just next to
Mt. Whiteface after taking the Kate Sleeper Trail when we decided to
stash one of our packs under the sloping corrugated-metal roof of the
soon-to-be discontinued Camp Shehadi hut.  We had a grueling 6.6 mile
round trip loop ahead of us to Mt. Passaconaway and back, and decided
it was a bit far to go without water, so we opted that Rob would take
the one pack on the way there, and I would carry it on the return.  So
the trail plunged down and down, and I was beginning to dread having
to carry the pack back up this wet rocky route when we finally reached
the bottom and began the ascent to Passaconaway.  Now, faced with
losing the last of her seven summits, Momma Big Munch lost her reserve
and smacked us with an all-out assault of hail.  Rabid, now, with
anticipation, we punched our way to the summit and experienced what
should have been called Mt. Passaconawayintheclouds, with absolutely
no view whatsoever, and came to the conclusion that Big Munch is a bad
loser.  It was now 6:10 PM and we had gone 34.2 miles with 9920 ft of
elevation gain.  Swapping the pack, we retraced our steps to the
Shehadi hut and finally arrived, wet, cold, hungry and all
a'shiverin', needing dinner, losing sunlight quickly, and faced with
many more miles of rugged terrain.  Perhaps the reason we do these
hikes is the deferred gratification of actually finishing them,
because I know for sure at this point we were not feeling too
comfortable or happy.

      Huddling by the hut, we munched some dinner but then cut it
short because it was getting too cold not to be moving.  At this point
came one of the trip-defining moments which offered much insight into
our speed-distance mentality.  You see, there are four ways to
increase one's speed on the trail.  The first is PHYSICAL, which can
be improved through conditioning.  The second is MOTIVATIONAL, which
can be improved by associating with a good hiking partner.  The third
is ORGANIZATIONAL, which covers pre-made spreadsheets and time-saving
equipment and proper food.  The fourth is IMPROVISATIONAL, which
really can't be planned, but just emerges in certain situations.  Now
of all the food we had carried, the five peaches were the unrivaled
jewels.  We had already eaten four, and were now so tired and cold
that the thought of a fight-to-the-death struggle over the remaining
peach had lost all its appeal.  So obviously we had to share the
fruit.  It's just that cutting the peach in half with a knife seemed
like such a waste of time, that Rob implored me to "just eat half",
and hand him the remaining salivary pulp while hiking (saving a good
ten seconds), after which he handed me back the slimy pit to be
stuffed into my pocket for the return journey, since, after all, some
people's definitions of littering can extend into the extreme.

       Now began the most heinous nocturnal descent down the
incredibly steep and totally soaked large-slab rock face of the
McCrillis Trail down from the south face of Mt. Whiteface.  Many a
slip, whoosh, and yelp were heard on that slide, often with a sudden
self-induced rain shower from a wet shaken tree grasped onto for dear
life.  We finally made it to the Flat Mountain Pond Trail junction
with only 6 miles and 800 ft of elevation gain to go to reach our
under-24 hour goal of 46.8 miles.  So we thought: only six miles with
only 800 ft of gain, this shouldn't take so long....but why does the
guidebook have an estimated leg-time of over four hours?  It turned
out the Flat Mountain Pond trail wasn't particularly flat or smooth,
was badly overgrown (who would venture to maintain a trail that leads
to the nigh-useless McCrillis Trail?), and was close to being a pond
itself.  Careful footwork that had previously kept our feet relatively
dry now degenerated into a plod-slip-plod through muddy bog.  Although
mentally alert, my ambulatory coordination was sacrificed as a
concession to physical fatigue.  Rob, who kept his coordination a bit
better than I, racking up slightly less stump-bumps and sinkhole
slides, nonetheless delved into more of the interesting mental
driftings.  If we weren't so exhausted, it would have been rather
comical watching me angrily heave offending trip-causing branches into
the woods, and Rob not even appearing to register the event.  So I was
beginning to wonder if Momma Big Munch was truly trying to extract her
final revenge when ker-plack!  A loud smack racked the ambient
frog-sounds of the nearby lake.  The trail disappeared into deep water
and we found ourselves next to a beaver dam (nature's own engineer!
-not very funny under these conditions).  Now we roamed around trying
to find where the trail resumed, and Rob, who up until now I had
suspected was sleep-walking, suddenly woke up mumbling something about
having experience in negotiating beaver dams.  Sure enough, the trail
resumed o

 Momma Big Munch's direct-intervention hazards.  Then after a few more
stream crossings we reached our goal of the Bennet Street Trailhead at
2:46 AM, having hiked 46.8 miles with 11620 ft of elevation gain.

 Now we decided to take our first relaxful break, unhurried and
thankful for a decent patch of dry ground upon which to momentarily
lounge.  Then we were back on the trail sometime after 4 AM, after
sucking down some of that newfangled caffeinated power gel, which
really works.  Rob muttered something like: "Dude, I can feel my heart
beating," less than five minutes after ingesting the substance.  We
had one last mountain to go, the 3980 foot Sandwich Mountain, which
didn't count as a 4000 footer but nonetheless was a challenge in our
condition.  So we proceeded up and up, not particularly fast since our
muscles had tightened during the previous break, and finally reached
the summit.  At this point, we realized that if we could go the 4.6
miles to the car in under 2 hours and 18 minutes we'd have done the
entire 53.8 mile loop (13770 ft gain) in under 30 hours.  So it became
a mad dash down the incessantly steep Sandwich Mountain trail, which
tapped into energy reserves we never knew we had.  We both slapped the
trunk of my car at 9:06 AM beating the arbitrarily self-imposed
deadline by a mere five minutes.

      We had accomplished our goal of ousting the mythic
Waterville-Sandwich Big Munch from its secure cradle in the southern
White Mountains.  The question remains, though, of how many other
mythic creatures out there are clamoring for a scrapping.


Andre' R. Girerd

