Date: Tue, 23 May 2000 11:38:39 -0400
From: Robert Zeithammer <rzeitham@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Trip Repost: Kilkenny Dash

KILKENNY DASH (Saturday , May 20, 2000): 

Two cones of light interrupt the vast late-night darkness up on Kilkenny ridge
in the northern White Mountains as they move stubbornly and quietly north.
Thick clouds hide the full moon and sprinkle the forest with a light drizzle.
The birch trees this high up don’t have leaves yet, so the two hikers can feel
every raindrop tapping on their shoulders. Totally focused on avoiding deep
mud-holes and lake-like puddles caused by the recent snow-melt, they don’t
have
the strength to talk much. Only occasionally does the first one make a short
jump and warns the second with an unpublishable word… after which the second,
says "shoot <pause> shoot <pause> shoot" as he mistakes a deep pool of thick
black mud for sturdy ground. When the mud stops, large granite boulders block
their path instead, sometimes reinforced by a tree that fell across the trail.
After a monotonous hour or so, one of them says “Break for five minutes”. As
they sit down and lean against a rock, he continues “This is really pushing
the
envelope!”. Then, silence engulfs them again. But they mustn’t allow their
fatigue and pains to overcome them, they mustn’t fall asleep, so they just get
up again and keep going…

Those two lonely hikers are two members of the MITOC Presidio Team, Hector
Briceno and myself. Trying to take advantage of the full moon in conjunction
with comfortable hiking conditions and no bugs, we climbed Mount Waumbek on
Saturday… From the South Pond Gate  22 miles away. This report brings you the
full story and shares the lessons we have learned.

MOTIVATION:
How far does the fractal up-and-down nature of White Mountain terrain allow
one
to hike in 24 hours? That was the question we had in mind when planning this
trip. So we packed as light as safety concerns allowed and headed to the North
Country of the White Mountains. The main trail in the area is called the
Kilkenny Ridge Trail, and it stretches all the way from the South Pond
trailhead over Mount cabot (4170) to Mount Waumbek (4006). The AMC guide
recommends it as a trail with few people, ideal for extended multi-day
backpacking trips…so we decided to do it in one day. Round-trip. 

SUMMARY STATISTICS: 44 miles (70 kilometers for metric people), 21.5 hours,
11,200 feet (3400 meters) up, 11,200 feet down, 2 4000ft-mountains (not too
much bang for the buck…), 8 summits, 7 of them twice. Total time spent
resting:
about 2.5 hours. Average hiking speed 2.3 MPH.

USUAL DISCLAIMER:
Don’t try this at home! This was the hardest day-trip of my life, Hector
concurs. We do not suggest that anyone should repeat our hike even though
certain individuals (R. J. & A.G. know who I am talking about…:-) might.
Safety-measures including bail-out plans, extra food, a nice cabin in the
middle, and bivy-gear (minimal: space-blanket, warm clothing, ground-pad,
extra-food) were an inherent part of our plan.

TRIP-REPORT:
We learned a few lessons before even putting on our hiking shoes: Lesson 1:
The
Boston Friday traffic is SO bad that a 3PM departure doesn’t beat it. So we
only made it to northern New Hampshire around 9PM. Lesson 2: The South Pond
road has a gate which remains closed during the night. Oh well, one extra mile
for us (that’s a good thing given our objectives).
The stars were great, the full moon was bright…and it was almost freezing
(35F!!) when we got up at 2:30 AM after four hours of sleep. By 3 AM, after a
donut power-breakfast supplemented with heat from shivering, we were on our
way
to the nearby South Pond  a beautiful place with a sandy beach we definitely
want to return to. 
And then it started. Mud, boulders, puddles, branches…Lesson 3: Photon
mini-flashlights really aren’t bright enough to support fast walking in such
terrain, though Hector thinks wearing glasses might help in the future… Lesson
3a: When your Petzl Zoom standard bulb breaks and all you have left is the
halogen one which will suck all power out of your rechargeable battery in 3
hours, you are in trouble. Luckily, we carried a spare standard bulb… Four
uphill miles later, we get the first reward  watching the pink pre-dawn
eastern
sky from Rogers ledge  one of the best viewpoints I have been to in the
Whites.
But even Rogers Ledge is easily surpassed by the crown jewel of the Kilkenny
Trail  The Horn (3905 ft.), our next destination. 
        When it’s 7AM and you are already 10 miles and 3000 vertical feet into
your hike, you know you are hiking with MITOC Presidio. We take our first real
(longer than 5 minutes) break and just soak in the sweeping 360-degree view
from this amazing peak. Mount Cabot almost within a stone-throw to the
south-west, an impressive massif of the Presidentials directly south of us,
Mahoosuc Range in the east, Green Mountains of Vermont far in the west, and
who-knows-what-they-are-called mountains in the north. Forests as far as the
eye can see, distant valleys capped in morning fog, York Pond glistening in
the
sun. But the chilling wind together with our pressing schedule chase us off
this beautiful summit towards the highest point of the trip  4170 feet high
Mount Cabot, a centerpiece of the range. (for someone else’s photos, see
http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/whites/cabot.html for our photos, wait a few
days).
We vow to return to the Horn in the future, Hector mumbles something about a
winter trip… I realize that these ludicrous-sounding remarks of his are
ultimately what generates epic trips like the one we are on right now, because
I vaguely recall having originally suggested the Kilkenny Ridge as a
challenging one-way day-hike myself…never in my wildest dreams would I come up
with this round-trip idea (again, this is a good thing, for those of you who
haven’t grasped our philosophy yet). Never mind, time to get going again.
        We reach the ugly wooded summit at 7:30 and not having found any
significant ice on the way up, Hector decides to cache his grippers. Worried
about the potential performance of his ultra-light trail-running shoes on
snow,
he brought these contraptions after a sliding incident on Mount Moriah in
March. (I am wearing regular high-cut hiking boots and trying not to
mention my
cosy dry feet too much to Mr. “but these dry out pretty fast” Briceno)  He
doesn’t realize that this caching move forces us to retrace our steps on the
way back, making various around-the-mountain strategies infeasible. Later on,
he will blame me for playing a trick on him when all I did was merely agree
with the brilliant idea of caching the extra weight…  hee hee! Before we know
it, we pass by the cabin on the more open southern summit, and head down the
switchbacks to Bunnell Notch. The people inside the cabin are still sleeping.
Whimps!
        The Bunnell Rock on the way down has a nice view, one of the last
of the
day. Still in high spirits and with strengths renewed by the newly-bagged rare
four-thousander, we charge across the two-peaked Terrace Mountain towards the
deep Willard Notch. I find myself needing to remark loudly “Ridge my a**!” as
we drop to 2700 feet on the so-called “ridge” trail. I don’t yet know of the
roller-coaster called Weeks Mountain that lies ahead… 
It’s now 9:30, we have covered 16 miles, and our bodies are starting to feel
it. So we settle down for a 20-minute break by a bubbling brook, refill
water-bottles, and in another weight-saving move, decide to cache one of them
at the Notch, because “it’s only 12 miles to Waumbek and back from here”. We
started with 2.5 quarts each, now we drop to 1.5 quarts each… Trying to
re-fuel, we eat as many granola bars and pop-tarts as a human can possible
swallow in 20 minutes. 
The scenic part of the day is over. No more views. Just the purgatory of
North,
Middle, and South Weeks Mountains. Lesson 4: Always be suspicious when
seeing a
mountain in the Whites with a name that involves a sub-categorization like
(south, middle, north) or (east, middle, west). This is an artifact of the
lack
of imagination of whoever had named the three completely INDEPENDENT peaks,
most likely separated by deep unforgiving notches. So we go 1200 ft. up, 800
ft. down, 600 ft. up, 300 ft. down, 500 ft. up, get lost on the summit of
South
Weeks, find ourselves again, go 200 ft. down, and finally 500 ft. up as we
finally reach Mount Waumbek (4006 ft.), the southern terminus of the Kilkenny
“Ridge” Trail and thus our half-way point (Mile 22, 12:30 PM) 
Exhausted, we try not to think about the fact that there is a road only 3
miles
away from here via a well-traveled Starr King Trail…gotta go pick up those
grippers… Lying down in the mid-day sun, we became an easy prey to the local
ferocious birds. They were able to snatch a Ritz Cracker or a Fig Newton
before
we could put it in our mouth. Lesson 5: When you look so tired that little
birds consider you fair game, it’s time to head back to the car.
Rejuvenated by
a 30-minute break, we greet a group of Scottish hikers who have arrived to the
summit just before one along the usual Starr King Trail, and head back via our
northern variation. The Weeks make us weak again, and the black Mount Cabot in
the distance looms awfully tall. On the descent from North Weeks, I feel so
sleepy that we need to stop for a 5-minute breather… Finally, our knees
shaking, we make it back to Willard Notch, ready for another break (Mile 28, 4
PM). Hector cannot quite extend his right knee without feeling an unhappy
tendon, but otherwise, we are “OK” (whatever that means in a situation like
ours). We can’t wait long, the weather is turning bad. Time to get moving… 
>From about this point, hiking is no longer fun. We focus our minds on the
summit of Cabot above us, and slowly but steadily move ahead. It starts
raining, time to put on a shell and…keep going. Finally, the cabin!!! (Mile
33,
7 PM) Two hikers inside have the stove already going, it’s cold and pouring
rain outside. What a great place to spend the night! It turns out that one of
the people in the cabin is a salesman at Wilderness House. He did seem
familiar…a sad realization: we are gear-heads after all. 
When you find yourself leaving a warm cozy cabin at 7PM to hike 11 miles
downhill in a rain, you know you are (you guessed it, I hope!) insane. OK, but
when you are hiking with MITOC Presidio, it’s just a routine part of your
training… So we pick up those damn grippers, and carefully descend to Unknown
Pond on our wobbly legs (3200 ft., Mile 36, 8:30 PM). The rain is on and off,
enough to make every log and boulder slippery, and the mountains seem at least
twice taller than in the morning. Passing two lonely tents at the campsite, we
seriously consider somehow driving their owners away and going to sleep in
their sleeping bags. And then, darkness descends upon us…
Going gets tough in the last saddle before Rogers Ledge, where the trail has
turned into several miles of hopping from boulder to boulder over deep
pools of
mud and water. As a cherry on top of this trap is a 100-foot walkway over a
swamp and a stream made of completely rotten and disconnected split logs. We
get paranoid, afraid of stepping on anything non-granite. Then, we resign to
our fate and simply walk through the stuff, even my waterproof boots give up
and get soaked. A short break at Mill Brook Trail Junction: Eating is hard,
all
those sweet bars we have with us seem extremely unappetizing. We day-dream
about Mc Donalds. Mental note: we must work on calorie-intake during future
hikes…
Last few hundred feet of ascent and we are at Rogers Ledge again. What was a
quick run uphill in the morning next becomes a downhill race against fatigue.
We both repeatedly fall asleep while walking. Hector discovers that his
prescription glasses do help him see after all. He didn’t wear them all day
because of fogging concerns… Instead of tripping and falling into
mud-holes, he
now looks like a coordinated humanoid bi-ped again. We take frequent micro-nap
breaks. As far as I am concerned, these last 5 miles lasted an eternity (Our
log shows 2.5 hours). By midnight, the trail levels off, we can see the pond.
Hector catches his twenty-seventh wind, and leads the charge to the car. The
last mile flies by, and before we know it, we are sleeping in our sleeping
bags
next to the car… Mile 44, 12:30 AM.

POST-SCRIPT:
We are up again at 7 AM, drive to Intervale to rendezvous with Luke and Dave,
and spend the Sunday climbing the 6-pitch “Sliding Board” at White Horse. It’s
amazing how much can the human organism recover in mere 6 hours of sleep after
something as grueling as the Kilkenny Dash…or how additicted some people
are to
climbing.  Increadible to think that 15 hours before we would not even
consider
climbing on Sunday, we even had a bail out excuse "oh it rained on
Saturday, so
the rock will be wet"...and indeed, the rock was wet… 


HISTORICAL NOTE: 
        A few questions remain: can we do 20 4000ft. peaks in 24 hours? Can we
do 60 miles in one day? FYI: The elevation condition set by D.A. on the second
challenge is at least 5000 ft. up and 5000ft. down. 

Robert Zeithammer


