From abbot@ll.mit.edu Tue Oct 17 12:48:10 2000
Date: Tue, 17 Oct 2000 11:58:31 -0400
From: "Abbot, Richard" <abbot@ll.mit.edu>
To: 'MITOC paddle' <paddle@mit.edu>
Cc: 'Catherine Lavelle' <catherine.lavelle@plattsburgh.edu>,
     'Stephen Paul Linder' <stephen.linder@plattsburgh.edu>
Subject: Columbus Day Saranac Lakes Sea Kayak TR

    [ The following text is in the "iso-8859-1" character set. ]
    [ Your display is set for the "US-ASCII" character set.  ]
    [ Some characters may be displayed incorrectly. ]

	This was quite a nice trip and is worth a bit of a write-up.

	This trip was hosted by Steve Linder and Cathy
	Lavelle who are former very active MITOCers and who
	now live in Plattsburg NY on the border of the
	Adirondacks.  You can contact them if you have
	any interest in either sea kayaking or canoeing in
	that area.  There are about 50 lakes in the region,
	many connected by water or short "Indian carries".
	One can certainly get some feel of what is must
	have been like in earlier times when Indians and
	Pioneers used these waterways for transportation
	by canoe.

	I anchored the trip from campus and was joined by
	Phoebe, Ian, Kevin, and Nate.

	Steve and Cathy had originally announced this trip
	for Lake Champlain, but with a potentially unsettled
	weather forecast, they suggested we go to the 
	Saranac Lakes in the Adirondacks not too far
	from Lake Placid.

	There are 3 of these Saranac Lakes: Upper, Middle
	and Lower.  Columbus Day was the weekend to do this trip
	with peak foliage, very little boat traffic (we saw just
	a few boats and people in our two days out), and 
	there was a nice dusting of snow in the surrounding 
	high peaks of the Adirondacks.

	The Upper and Middle lakes are connected by a
	"Indian Carry" of about .5 mile.  The Middle and Lower
	lakes are connected by a river and a lock (do-it-yourself
	off-season).  There is available camping in the form of lean-tos
	and campsites, mostly on the Upper Saranac and
	again abundantly on the Lower Saranac.  I called the
	Lower Saranac Hide-and-Seek lake since there were
	so many islands that you could literally play hide-and-seek 
	with the sea kayaks.  

	The put-in was at a boat ramp near the Saranac Lake Inn 
	at the northern tip of the Upper Saranac.  We took one
	car to another boat ramp on a river connected to the Lower
	Saranac, although we eventually actually took most of
	the boats out at the Ampersand boat ramp at the end of
	the Lower lake and near the town of Saranac Lake.

	We started about midday on Saturday and paddled for
	a few hours down the left shore into bays and around islands
	looking for a campsite.  After a bit of a hale storm, we found
	a site with abundant room and fire ring and a small table.
	It continued to rain, but Steve had brought a large tarp (carried
	to the top of his sea kayak) and we huddled under that
	and made dinner and headed for the tents.  

	The next day started clear, but it had gotten colder.  We were
	in and out of snow squalls all day, with some brief moments
	of sun in between.  We had to find the connection to the
	Middle lake and found this near the lower end of the Upper
	Lake on the left side.  There is a spit of land on the left with 
	a small break and if you paddle through that and stay left
	and head up a river, you'll soon see signs for the landing
	where you carry to the Middle lake.

	The 0.5 mile carry was the more labor intensive aspect of the 
	trip, especially with all the camping gear and an odd number
	of paddlers (it took two people to carry a sea kayak).  This took
	a few hours but we were soon on the Middle Lake.  This is the 
	smaller of the lakes and is open and this was a quick paddle.

	The next thing we had to search for was the river leading from
	the Middle to Lower lakes.  We found this in the marsh grass
	at the end of the Middle lake and followed this to the lock.  Cathy 
	had the honors of being Lock manager, and I think we have some
	pictures I hope we can post of all 7 sea kayaks huddled in the
	lock.  It was about a 3 foot drop to the Lower Lake.  The
alternative
	to the lock are some rapids.  I suppose if you left the lock door 
	open, you could drain the upper lakes :)

	Now in the Lower Saranac, we found a nice lean-to camp on the
	first major point on the left side.  Steve had also brought a fire
	log to get the wet wood started and we soon had a nice fire.  
	Temperature now about 36 degrees F, but Ian went in and did a 
	long session of rolling and self rescue practice.  

	The next day had moments of glorious sun followed by snow
	squalls.  Sitting in the middle of the Lower Lake in the sun
	(between snow squalls) enjoying the spectacular scenery of
	colors around the lake and snow in the high mountains was
	spectacular.  

	To end our trip, Steve, Cathy and I paddled to the boat ramp where 
	we left one car and let the others finish the Lower Lake where
	we all joined at the Ampersand boat ramp.  Lunch was in
	the town of Ray Brook, where we watched a nice fluffy snow
	fall and accumulate on the sea kayaks on tops of our cars.

	Lake Placid is unique of course since it has a lot of the remnants
	of the 86(?) winter Olympics, including those impressive ski jumps.
	It's also a bustling tourist and ski town.

	All members of the trip were quite prepared for the cold weather
	paddling.  I think the biggest issue was keeping hands and feet warm
	since us sea kayakers are used to warmer weather paddling.  I
	had a pair of nylon pogies with fleece lining and my hands were
toasty
	while paddling.  And I wore a pair of heavy polypro socks under
neoprene
	booties and that kept my feet warm, although some said they were
	better off in bare feet in the booties.


	I expect I'll consider making this an annual classic for Columbus
	Day weekend.

	Rick
