Date: Wed, 21 Nov 2001 13:57:24 -0500 (EST)
From: Deb Fraser <deb@wildmountain.net>
Subject: Winter-like PresiTraverse Attempt Report

Trip report:

Winter-like Presidential Traverse Attempt
During the Weekend of Leonids in November 2001
----------------------------------------------

This is the long report of a small, unofficial trip to the White
Mountains of NH from Nov. 16 to 18, 2001.  The five participants were
(in alphabetical order): Christine Aussibal, Hector Briceno, Deb
Fraser, Christian Holtze, and An Nguyen.

The plan was to do the Presidential Traverse from south to north as a
2.5 day winter-like backpack.  Although not officially winter yet, the
conditions were pretty much that of winter, hence we shall use the
term "winter-like".  The adventure started at the Student Center
loading dock as so many adventurous hikes have started there.  It
might have been a bit misleading that two of us where in short
sleeves, one even in shorts leaving for a winter hike, but this just
shows how rugged our team was.  We packed our two cars, had dinner at
the Student Center and hit the road.  On the drive up, we stopped near
Woodstock for gas and coffee, and while feeding the cars with
gasoline, we indulged in some homemade fudge that evoked our interest
as it was displayed in the most appetizing manner.  They even had
Pumpkin!  It was like sweet pumpkin pie.  Loaded with fuel (gas,
caffeine, and sugar), we continued our way up to the northern end of
the Presidential Range to spot one car, some (Christian) thinking
about how tough we were (what could be so hard about hiking at this
time of year?) and others (Deb) about how crazy we were.  Christian was
surprised when we came to the Appalachia parking lot and found that
there were already had 4 or 5 cars and various other tough people
making preparations before a cold night in the rough wilderness.  He
was disappointed that we were not the only ones.

At that point, Hector's car had to wear his backpack for the short
drive to Crawford Path, while five people and loads of gear were
squeezed inside.  On the way to our actual starting point, Hector
displayed a very considerate behavior for a hobby astronomer:
switching off the headlights in the middle of Route 2, he managed to
decrease light pollution drastically.  Only momentarily at the
passengers' encouragement, thankfully!  And Christian noticed a patch
of snow by the side of the road about the diameter of a hubcap, and
got excited: "Did you see that snow!?  Let's go skiing!"  This
suggestion was to become a common theme throughout the weekend.

We arrived near the start of Crawford Path on the south end, and at
11:30 pm, we were all set: headlights on, bent over under the heavy
weight of our backpacks we started a chilly night hike.  Did you know
that Crawford Path is the oldest consistently used trail in America?
Yep, there is even a sign there that says so.  First it was quite
cool, but we gradually warmed up as we got moving.  We faced the first
patches of snow with: "Wow, let's go skiing!", but as we continued up
the mountain, the footing got much more slippery with wet ice, we had
a few minor spills among the group, and our pace slowed.  We warmed up
quite significantly with the exercise, fooling Hector: "It's much
warmer up here, I think we've hit a temperature inversion."

After two hours of hiking, Christian started to feel the decisive
signals from his stomach that it wouldn't take long until starving to
death.  We were all getting quite tired by this point.  But we did not
stop.  Hector was keeping us on pace to cover at least 2000 ft
elevation gain, so we should more easily make our stretch the next day
in daylight.  It wasn't looking so good for finding a camping spot,
but then at about 2:20 am Hector found this cozy spot in the woods off
the trail that just seemed made for us.  Then we had to set up camp,
as we started to get cold.  There was about 10 inches of snow
cover/drift, maybe more in some spots.  Shoving the snow with the flat
end of the ice-axes, we managed to get two fairly leveled spots for
our tents, and set them up.  Hector had his 2-person single-wall
winter tent which he and Christian shared, and the three ladies
squeezed in a spacious 2-person 3-season tent.  By 3:00 am we were in
the tents.  Hector proposed that we get up at 7:00am, giving us what
he called a more-than-generous four hours of sleep.  Thirty seconds
later, Christian: "I was lying at five inches from Hector's snoring
throat, while the girls were still talking in their tent.  Soon after
I also passed out."  Deb: "Who's Snoring?  Already!?  I couldn't
believe how fast they were out."  Hector left his tent door half open
to prevent condensation on the inside of the tent, and Christian's
nose almost froze.  The ladies had it rougher as the rain fly the
3-season tent wasn't staked to let the condensation air out, and it
froze on the inside of the fly, making it feel quite cool inside,
especially for the two near the edges of the tent.  Christine wasn't
able to sleep, we came to find out in the morning, as she was freezing
due to the moisture soaking through to her sleeping bag.  Deb got
about 2-3 hours feeling squished yet mostly warm, buried deep in the
sleeping bag on the other side of the tent.  An was probably the
warmest, cozy in the middle.

At 7:00 am, the guys were up first and measured 20 degrees F, although
Hector estimated that it had dropped to a low of between 10-15 degrees
F overnight.  It was a beautiful morning with blue sky, just before
the sun came out.  Having a head start, the guys boiled the water,
while the girls tried to clean up camp a little and prepare the food.
A painful sting came to the feet and hands as they warmed up during
the morning activity.  Preparing breakfast took a while, but we
managed to get some hot chocolate, tea, oatmeal, bread, cheese, jam,
etc. for the group.  We huddled in the larger 3-season tent to stay
warm while eating.
 
Shortly after 9:15 am we managed to start hiking, and we saw that we
had camped just below treeline on Mt. Pierce, and had covered a good
distance during our night hike.  Warm sunshine let our surroundings
appear, the most beautiful winter-wonderland one can imagine.
Although more strenuous, only winter-hiking can provide this
atmosphere.  Shortly after, we arrived on the summit of Mt. Pierce,
with a beautiful view of Mt. Eisenhower, Mt. Washington, Mt. Jefferson
and Mt. Adams.  The sky was incredibly clear.  On this crowded morning
we met two other groups of four to five persons and at least two more
couples and a single hiker later on.  Staying just shortly, we then
proceeded to Mt. Eisenhower.  Water had frozen on the trail making it
a slippery slope.  In some places there were humps of snow with
two-foot holes from previous hikers that had sunken in.  The final
ascent to the summit of Mt. Eisenhower was a bit steep, but well worth
the effort with the heavy packs.  The view was spectacular, ideal
hiking weather and no wind.  Christian had bagged his last remaining
presidential peak.  An was the closest she had ever been to the summit
of Washington and there was a clear view of the observatory towers on
top.  Hector timed our breaks just like a professional to keep us on
pace to our destination.  A short cookie break, a group picture, and
we left again.

Very shortly after we started our descent, Christine had problems
walking with the weight bearing down.  She was in serious pain, and we
learned she had twisted her knee the night before when she slipped on
the way up.  Thinking that it would be alright, she had hiked up all
the way.  But after the cold night and the break on Mt. Eisenhower,
she felt a ligament and could not bend it.  Hector began having
visions of beer and warmth back at Intervale cabin and the decision
was made instantly to bail out on an escape route.  We were slightly
disappointed not to make out goal, and yet very relieved not to have
to bear the freezing cold and wind camping out that night.
Presidentials in the winter another time, maybe.

The guys doctored Christine's knee with a bandage and two analgesics,
and we then distributed the weight from her pack to the rest of the
group members.  Christine made her way down bravely, luckily she was
able to walk out, as we headed down on Edmand's Path.  We even got a
chance to use our crampons, since there was so much ice on the trail,
until we reached about the halfway point where the trail was mostly
dirt.  And for the rest of the day there was a friendly rivalry
between Christian and Hector on who had the heaviest pack.  We figured
we'd have to walk another 3-4 miles from the trailhead back out to Rte
302 to get Hector's car.  But we got lucky -- a couple also heading
down passed us just before the trailhead, and Hector was able to hitch
a ride with them to get his car.

He soon returned and once again, we all crammed in his car.  He was
very tempted to take a nice shortcut through the valley on Jefferson
Notch Road instead of driving all the way around on the highway.  Deb
warned him that the dirt road was not maintained in winter and
might be too treacherous for a car with only front wheel drive.
Seeing only patches of snow and among the dirt on the entrance
of the road, we decided to take the chance that it would not be that
bad, thinking it would save time.  Little did we know, further up, the
road was pretty much covered with packed snow and ice making it very
slippery.  The car was slipping around quite a bit with loose traction.
Although Hector was managing to keep up the momentum and doing a
balancing-act of steering to keep us on the road, we came to a point
where an SUV coming in the opposite direction forced him to the side
of the road where he had to stop.  We were worried that we were now
stuck.  Incredibly, luck was still on our side.  The very next vehicle
coming toward us was a Hummer!  We could not have asked for anything
better.  Hector, thinking quickly, flagged the driver and asked him to
wait to see if we could get out.  When Hector tried to move, the car
ended up sliding sideways toward the ditch.  We were stuck.  The dude
with the Hummer pulled us out from behind, so we were straight on the
road again.  Hector was able to back up, crest the small hill, find
a relatively flat dirt patch to turn around on further up, and we
headed back.  It wasn't worth continuing as we would have had at
least 3/4 of the road still to cover.  We caught a small glimpse of a
gorgeous sunset through the trees.  Once hitting the asphalt again,
Hector was overjoyed to be in full control of his car, singing the
praises of friction, that we all too often take for granted!  He even
demonstrated the responsiveness of the car to the steering wheel by
making large swerves on the road.  We were all impressed, but assured
him that we really could just take his word for it!

We drove all the way around the mountains that we had hoped to
traverse across, and picked up the other car.  Stopped to put air in
Hector's tires, went to dinner, picked up the beer, and then went to
surprise the group staying at the Intervale cabin.  They had a nice
roaring fire going when we arrived, and we got to tell them all about
our adventure.  By 10:30-11:00 pm, some of us were ready for bed,
feeling rather beat.  And we wanted to get up at 4 am to watch the
peak of the Leonids meteor shower, as it was supposed to be one of the
largest, most spectacular ones, occurring once about every 33 or whatever
years.  Several of us camped out in sleeping bags and bivy sacks on
the observation deck, and the rest preferred the warmth of the cabin.

As we went to sleep outside, the sky was covered with clouds.
Christian assured us that it would be clear later.  It had to be,
because if mother nature went through the trouble of putting the
meteor shower on the weekend, so we'd have time to watch it, then she
would also have to make sure it was clear.  Deb woke up at 1:30 am and
it was still overcast.  At about 2:30 am there were some "Ooo's" and
"Ahh's" that woke us up.  The sky was clear and we saw many stars and
several meteors with bright tails shoot across the sky.  We tried to
get some more Zzz's before the peak near 4.  Deb woke up again at 3:30
am, and saw more shooting meteors.  At about 3:45 am, she saw about 5
right in a row and decided to make some noise to wake more people up.
What followed a most amazing display of shooting meteors over the next
two hours.  The people from the cabin joined in at about 4:30 am.
Christian turned into the cookie monster, making comments every 5 or
10 minutes about how he was tempted to go outside the warm sleeping
bag to fetch his bag of cookies, until he finally did.  He also felt
bad for meteors as the were dying, burning to bits in our atmosphere
merely for our enjoyment.  People hypothesized about the physics of
meteors, the orientation of their trajectory as they were entering the
atmosphere as the burning tails seemed to go in opposite directions,
the explanation of the burning tail pattern, and why we saw orange
and green colors when they exploded, appearing to hit the atmosphere
dead on. etc.  What else would expect from MIT students?  People's
comments were often interrupted with squeaks of delight and amazement in
mid-speech while witnessing the show above us.  It was quite awesome,
extraordinarily spectacular, beyond words.  At one point Deb counted
about 15-20 shooting meteors within a minute, and there was probably
more that we couldn't see.  Hector was having trouble staying awake,
and also trouble falling back asleep as we kept making so much noise
with our "Ooo's" and "Ahh's".  At 5:30 am the sun began to rise and
sky got progressively lighter.  It was more difficult to see the
stars, but you could tell the meteors were still quite actively
falling, and only the brightest ones were clearly visible in the sky.
Deb: "The sunrise was very pretty with a rainbow prism effect on the
horizon.  After 6 am, as the others drifted back to sleep, I saw two
very bright meteors burn through the morning sky, one with a bright
orange blaze at the end."

We slept until about 10:00 am.  We got up and packed, and Hector
serenaded to An to wake her up in the cabin she as was out cold.  He
has a very nice voice actually.  We said good-bye to the other group,
and went to Yesterday's in Jackson for breakfast -- the "Country Man's
Special" -- a lot of good food!  And then headed to Crawford Notch to
do a light hike to Aresutha Falls, as Hector wanted to check it out
for ice climbing later in the season.  Christine, with her bad knee,
waited for us at the car.  Hector and Christian packed the last two
remaining beers in an empty cookie tin for the trip, and then chilled
the beer in the freezing brook just below the falls.  The trail was
really cool with lots of rocks and gnarly tree roots.  We enjoyed the
view of the falls, the guys relaxed with their beers, and we watched a
chubby red squirrel scoping us out for food.  Hector climbed the steep
trail on the side of the waterfall to keep warm as he didn't bring a
windbreaker, and the rest of us followed to get a view from the top.
We returned to the car, and Christian tried to eat a old apple still
dangling from one of the trees.  He offered a bite to An, who
proceeded to make the most interesting face in response to to the bad
taste.  He also taught us how to whistle using our fingers and the top
of an acorn.  Then we made our way back to Boston.

The weekend was full of adventure, surprises, and good times!

Deb and Christian













