


How to Camp With Hector Briceno: 20 Steps to Excellence
                      by Amy Fair

Participants: 
 Yoko Miyata (repeat from previous weekend)
 Dave Comi (repeat from previous weekend)
 Sayan Mitra
 Amy Fair
 Hector Briceno
Date: Friday 1/18- Sunday 1/20


1) Smoke crack

2) Leave Boston at the same time as every working person in a 50 mile
   radius and go to the same mountains as these people plan to ski.

3) Go to BJs and stock up with 20 lbs of raw meat, pasta, and other
   snacks.

4) Hit The Flume at 11 pm for hard core ice climbing.  Throw mittens
   and ax in the 30º rushing water 40 feet below.  Here's some free
   advice: mittens fly and land wherever the hell they want, most
   likely in the least likely and least desirable of locations.
   Super-crack option: Try to climb the Flume in under 16.8 seconds
   with one ax and no headlamp.  Ok, so maybe with a headlamp...

5) 4 am: Smoke more crack.

6) Remove car battery and load plastic sled with over 200 lbs of shit
   including, but not limited to, the 20 lbs of food, 30 lb car
   battery, portable speakers, laptop, tent and camp stoves.  Attach
   this sled to the person who smoked the most crack (i.e., Hector)
   and laugh.

7) Watch sunrise while setting up camp.

8) Take a nap.  No need for a tent.

9) Another fix of crack.

10) Go climb a mountain, making sure that everyone gets a chance to
    lose their snowshoe at some point.  At least one should be
    mysteriously buried 3 feet under the snow along a steep cliff
    during the hike.

11) Turn around shortly after reaching a point of reception for your
    cell phone, bypassing the top because it's 15 miles farther than
    you thought and the 2 hour nap somehow didn't meet the needs of
    the crack-based physical pursuits.

12) Lay off the crack for a while.  It's only making things worse,
    anyway.

13) Crank up the Rocky tunes and belt out all the words you know from
    Going the Distance.  Eat steak and pasta with your hands out of a
    Frisbee while poking out of a tarp and go to bed.  Ignore the fact
    that it's snowing.

14) After breakfast, dance some merengue and put on some cologne to
    cover that nasty smell of crack and body odor.

15) Give in to your addiction and have another fix of crack, followed
    by skiing across a little strech of ice over swift-running water
    and up some huge snowy boulders.

16) Make a mental note of the waiver you signed...

17) Spend 16 minutes trying to put on your skis.  Super-crack option:
    With Eye of the Tiger blaring from your 200 lb sled, sprint for
    6.8 miles on your cross-country skis.

18) Topple over from too much crack - er, exhaustion.  Lay there and
    moan for a few minutes until your arm goes numb.  Then ask for
    help getting up from a passing hiker.

19) Attempt to not blow up the car by using probability to figure out
    which is negative on the car battery.

20) Pat yourself on the back!  If this was your first winter campout,
    you are now a professional.

[Hector Addenum: for those who would like the precise numbers: line
(2) 3:30pm, (3) 5 lbs, (4) 110 seconds, (6) sled total 160 lbs, 20 lbs
of food , and 30 lb car battery, (8) 2.9 hour napity-nap, (11) no
comments, probably 0.5 miles to go to summit of bondcliff, (14)
Sharan, (17) 3 miles]

[There is also a no-no-details trip report for this trip by Hector]
