Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA28993; Mon, 26 Jan 98 15:28:43 EST
Received: from MATH.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA12410; Mon, 26 Jan 98 15:26:20 EST
From: Bonnie Friedman <bonnie@math.mit.edu>
Message-Id: <199801262026.PAA18731@schubert.mit.edu>
Subject: x-c ski trip report
Date: Mon, 26 Jan 1998 15:26:12 -0500 (EST)
X-Mailer: ELM [version 2.4 PL25]
Content-Type: text

Hi,

After a miserable drive up Friday night (should take 2 hours in
good weather, took 4-6 hours for those who made it, others
stopped at hotel in Concord).  We were pleasantly surprised to
find moist snow (good for snowpeople, bad for turns) and no crust
or ice on Saturday.  We went up to Mousilauke and found early
reports to be true.  We found some ice on Rt. 118 at the height
of land, around 2500 ft.  But the road to Mousilauke is at 1800
ft.  We ascended road to Ravine Lodge and then continued on to
Merrill Ski Loop trail.  Trail was in great shape.  Two women had
broken trail for a while and then gave up due to water gullies.
We didn't have much trouble with the gullies.  They were each
marked with red ribbons so they were not easily missed.  New snow
was about 6-10 inches deep so trail breaking was tiring but not
too difficult.  When we got to around 3100 or 3200 ft. we finally
found ice damage, but none until then.  At that point we
continued ducking under bent ice covered trees for another hour
until around 3500 or 3600 ft.  But we were running out of day
light and not running out of ice covered trees, so we finally
turned around.  The damaged bent trees probably only continued
for another few hundred yards, but it was hard to know for sure.
No one had broken loop from the Ridge trail side.  Going back
down the way up was lots of fun.  I think it might have more longer 
gradual downhills than the Ridge trail way which I have done a
couple of times before.  We got out just in time for darkness.
The first section having to duck under the trees again took
almost as long as the climb in that area, but the rest was fast
and fun.

On Sunday we decided to go near Mousilauke since we knew that the
ice damage was minimal.  We tried to find the Three Ponds trail
from the Rt. 118 entrance.  After a couple of false starts on
logging roads we met up with a couple of women who had talked to
a local and discovered that the trail entrance was probably in
Marty's backyard.  Marty's house is quite distinctive with
several mailboxes, an American flag and a whole bunch of fish &
game decorations.  Gingerly we skied across his driveway and low
& behold, a little road in his backyard led to the summer trail
head and parking area.  The snow had changed substantially
overnight.  The snow had dried out a lot to be a very light
powder and now seemed more like a foot deep.  But, unfortunately,
it had a light crust.  Going on a flat trail was ok, except that
our heavier members of the group found that the lighter members
didn't sink enough to pack the snow for them.  They felt like
they were breaking trail again.  But climbing was even more
difficult since once you broke through the crust you slid on the
light powdery snow.  My group got too frustrated with the
breaking trail and voted to leave.  But Three Ponds trail has a
lot of possibilities as an advanced ski route.  The trail is
quite wide and climbs nicely through scattered trees.  So at
least this author was very disappointed not being able to enjoy
the downhill due to the crust.  You really had to stay in the
broken tracks to be able to ski down.  If you went off the
tracks, you slid on the ice for a while until the crust caved in
and you fell down.   Next stop, back to Mousilauke.  There, we
quickly learned that the loop we skied yesterday was now all
frozen and too icy to enjoy.  Hoping for some snowshoers to have
broken the Ridge trail we still headed toward the Ravine Lodge.
But once there discovered that other trails were broken but not
the Ridge trail.  The crust at Mousilauke was even thicker than
at the lower elevation Three Ponds trail so we gave up.  Where we
did find newly broken trail by snowshoers it was wonderful to ski
since they made wide trails through the crust and uncovered the
lovely powder below.  But no one had been nice enough to break
the trail we wanted.  So we called it a day.  After all we had
been out at least moving on skis for around 5 hours so it seemed
like enough even if we hadn't gotten very far.  

So, in summation, we only found ice on the road at 2500 ft and on
the trail at 3200-3500 ft. or so.  We did meet people who had
managed to snowshoe up the Gorge Brook trail to the summit of
Mousilauke so the ice damage in that area is thankfully very
minimal.  Thanks to all who gave suggestions on where to find
minimal ice damage before the weekend.

						---Bonnie

