Warning:  Despite the fact that this trip occurred over a year ago, I've 
finally finished the report (phew!), and can attest to its modern 
applicability.  -A.R.G.

Trip Report: Introduction to Extreme Hiking Clinic - The Presidential Traverse
Carlos Brain, Pat Brown, Amy Chiuchiolo, Bill Finger, Andre' Girerd, Chrissy 
Guth, Tom Hunt, Rob Jagnow
Roughly 21 miles and something on the order of 8,000 ft of elevation gain.
June 24, 2000

PROLOGUE
      Well situated in MITOC lore is the knowledge that a Presidential 
Traverse provides an ideal training ground for those wishing to be dissuaded 
from entering the sport of extreme hiking.  ("Grrrr.")  It's length suffices 
to inflict enough muscular distress to frighten away the everyday 
"picnicker", while its steep elevation gains could easily tempt a tired 
tenderfoot to cry out for an oxygen mask, until embarrassingly reminded of 
the relative low altitude.  ("No more... no more air.., oh please, my lungs!  
Wait, we're not even a mile up?  Aw shucks then, I'm fine.")  Yet the 
traverse also pampers its interlopers with a motherly affection bordering on 
indulgence.  Paul Bunyan, you see, trading his trusty axe for a 1920's style 
Tommy gun, used to treat the Presidentials as his own personal shooting 
range.  And wherever one of his bullets landed, there appeared something we 
call a "hut."  To this very day, we can find "huts" all over the 
Presidentials, almost as a testament to the wild aim of Ol' Bunyan.  These 
"luxury motels of the alpine wasteland" emit reassuring odors like coffee and 
hot chocolate, and are always available to cocoon the weary traveler inside a 
windproof barricade of safety and comfort.  One particularly egregious 
example is the shack on the top of Mt. Washington, which offers a supply of 
such natural resources as Gatorade, ice cream, and soup-of-the-day.  So the 
traverse offers the neophyte extreme hiker a decent challenge in a relatively 
safe (coddling) environment, as long as the wind isn't tearing you in half, 
the temperatures behave themselves, and the thought of snow cover is a only 
quaint memory from yesteryear.


Episode I : THE APPROACH
      Even though the trip was billed as an "introductory clinic" to extreme 
hiking, there were several participants who obviously already posessed the 
requisite certification of insanity.  Among these was Chrissy 
(marathon-running and boulder-carrying) Guth, who we immediately pressed into 
a contest of EXTREME EATING with MITOC newcomer Tom Hunt, better known for 
his penchant for 200 mile, 15-hour bike rides into the Sierra Nevada.  The 
purpose of the contest, which arose while waiting for Carlos Brain to finish 
his EXTREME toilet session, was to see if it was humanly possible to eat a 
single slice of bread in under a minute.  Now Rob Jagnow and I, who had 
already attempted this challenge and recognized the human impossibility of 
it, totally commiserated with Tom, when he loaf-mouthed mumbled his 
acknowledgement of defeat.  What we weren't prepared for was Chrissy's 
clean-mouthed outcry at about 40 seconds saying she had finished.  After a 
quick check for hidden bread crumbs and a rigorous under-the-tongue 
inspection, we conceded that Chrissy had truly accomplished the impossible.  
All that without utilizing pre-salivation, considered by Rob and I the only 
technique with a remote chance of success!  You must contact her for the 
secret tactic.
     We had split into two vehicles for the ride up; my green two-door, and 
Pat's black jeep.  It is interesting to note the differences in vehicle 
participant group dynamics.  The occupants of the black jeep, their comfort 
obliterated by some legendary malnutrition, were obsessed with a desire to 
commence munching, at least before our dinner stop, which afterwards they 
substituted for an equally fervent urge to preserve the dwindling available 
sleep time before early-morning arousal, keeping track of the remaining 
possible nap-length at frequent intervals.  In my green car, any sense of 
urgency was relegated to finding a suitable highway toll station with which 
to demonstrate "this totally cool stunt, guys, really" that Amy had conjured 
up from somewhere in her past.  Tom, inhabiting the right front passenger's 
seat, proceeded to execute a brilliant rendition of the one-handed, two coins 
over the roof, no look, highway fare-basket drop shot, that earned the 
heartwarming goodwill of the stoked road travelers behind us.  Then came what 
might have been the WORST INVENTION OF ALL MANKIND, as we attempted to 
entertain ourselves by having a little contest.  The goal was to find an 
anthem on the radio so hideous that the other passengers would break down and 
change the channel from sheer agony before the song finished.  Needless to 
say, my passengers had ears of steel, and despite sopping with anguish they 
chose the uncomfortable path of pain over the more hoped-for route of gamely 
submission.  So, alternating in the role of provocateur, we squirmed through 
countless renditions of the most unlistenable incarnations of country, 
angst-pop, and classic rock, until finally outdone by my own special 
prescription: the static-crackled ballad of death.
     After dropping my car off at the trail's ending point at Crawford Notch, 
we mush-wrenched the party into the black jeep for the short trip to 
Intervale.  So determined were we to reach our destination that not even the 
bloodthirsty beast-wolfdogs guarding the overgrown entrance to the Intervale 
access path could hope to stop us, despite having teeth and jaws capable of 
massive door-rippage.

Episode 2: THE HORROR, THE HORROR
     The impossibly cherished hope of being refreshed before the next day's 
excursion surrendered to the collective concession that the minimus of 
available sleep potential was but merely a prescription for hallucinogenic 
hiking.  Such a condition was thus deemed beneficial, since it would 
doubtless augment the overall group experience without the discomforts of 
illegality or a peskily pricey pharmacopoeia.  So, consigned to the 
insufficient slumber of our own making, we arranged ourselves into a somewhat 
lopsided lotus-flower pattern on the floor of the round yurt, with Mr. Bill 
Finger having the unwelcome honor of inhabiting the center.  At last, we 
could finally begin to enjoy our two hours of sleep before the mandatory 
wake-up.  With a mumble here and there, hindered by the occasional elbow-jab, 
people slowly started to drift into their respective dream states when 
YEOOWW!!, an absolute explosion of shocked fright came bursting out of Bill 
Finger's lungs at the grandest available volume.  AAHH, GET IT OFF ME!!   
WRAHHH!  As a lone drop of water hits placid water, sending out ring-like 
waves in ever greater concentric circles, so did the writhing terror of 
Finger spread from his central position to the far reaches of the yurt, 
hitting the walls and reflecting back, amplified, to create a veritable 
tsunami of fear and confusion.  Only when some semi-somnolent victim managed 
to avoid the thrashing limbs long enough to secure a light source did the 
absence of any beast-wolfdog become crushingly apparent.  There comes a time 
in every man's life when he confronts his worst fears, and for Bill Finger, 
that time came at night, at 1AM, in a yurt with seven other witnesses.  Of 
course, the official story is that there must have been a "bat", which 
conveniently flew out of the yurt amidst the ensuing confusion, but which 
nevertheless managed to sneak in beforehand and affix itself to its victim 
without any of the surrounding sentries detecting its flapping movements.  
There being only one more hour before wake-up time, the enthusiasm for a 
full-blown criminal investigation was remarkably lacking, so whatever really 
happened at 1AM in the middle of the yurt shall remain forever unproven.  

Episode 3: REVEILLE
     Since nobody was truly asleep when all the watch-alarms started blaring 
nearly simultaneously, the morning wakeup at 2 AM proceeded remarkably 
smoothly.  With much mooching of gatorade and powdered-sugar donuts, we 
finished our provisioning and began the drive to the Dolly Copp trailhead.  
Now Pat, perhaps inspired by the tales of torture from the preceding day's 
unwholesome car game, decided to "set the mood" by blasting his collection of 
Britney Spears songs.  Unlike his passengers, Pat actually seemed to enjoy 
this CD, and undeniably relished in the prospect of prying the execrable 
tunes into our brains so irrevocably that they would haunt us throughout the 
entire hike.  After some early-morning detours (Dolly Copp picnic ground is 
not the same as Dolly Copp campground), we discovered the trailhead, 
collected our gear, and generated such a loud group yell that we not only 
eradicated any lingering elements of sleepiness within our party, but perhaps 
squashed those of a large part of the White Mountains as well.  At 3:41 AM we 
commenced the traverse.

Episode 4: THE AWAKENING (or Voyage of the Dawn Trodder)
     Some may assert that the nocturnal incunabula of an epic journey claims 
primacy in its pantheon of special moments, since the vaguely underlying 
psychological barrier against actually commencing the surefire physical 
torture has been overcome, yet the inevitable suffering is postponed beyond 
an initial window of ache-free, strength abounding, celebratory experience of 
the marvels of the human body as an efficient muscular machine.  Furthermore, 
the black, mysterious forest-void envelops one as a symbolic initiation, 
calling to mind all the imagery of accumulated human folklore about 
wilderness and wildernesses, but whose potentially foreboding overtones are 
outcrooned by the clamor of abundant adrenaline.  At this point, the always 
inherent social nature of humans thrusts itself into the fore, spawning 
countless conversational threads in a relentless hysteria of group chatter 
that to a participant, when mixed with the released endorphins of concurrent 
athleticism, would unerringly provide that simple, yet sublime, feeling of 
being "alive."  However, a hypothetically dispassionate, well-perched, 
outside observer of our activity, uninfected by a sleep-deprived tincture of 
hallucination, might reach an opposite conclusion; namely that we were the 
walking dead, or at the very least, intellectually moribund.  Regard the 
following conversation up the mountain:

Andre': "Have you tried the new 'Balance' bars?"
Chrissy: "They're great, I'm thinking about buying a pair."
Andre': "I'd like to test their effectiveness in a workout over time."
Chrissy: "If they can prevent my feet from getting sore, that'd be ideal."
Andre': "Or just general fatigue.  Have you seen the chocolate, or berry?"
Chrissy: "No, I think they only come in white or reflective green/blue."
Andre': "I haven't tasted those yet.  But I like the new crunchy aspect."
Chrissy: "Like when running over gravel?"

This line of conversation went on for about five minutes before Chrissy 
realized that I was talking about the new 'Balance' bars and I discovered she 
was talking about 'New Balance' shoes.
     Despite our collective stupor, the group managed to reach an agreement 
(no small feat under these circumstances) to momentarily pause and enjoy 
(Dude!) one of the most spectacular sunrises ever witnessed, a multi-layered 
panorama of color that looked like an infinite Southwestern-style sand-jar 
decoration.  Around this time Amy whipped out the first of her two infamous 
electronic devices, a small GPS unit that when examined elicited the 
response: "Um, we haven't gone very far."  But surely enough, the Daniel 
Webster-Scout Trail soon led us to some open talus and onward to the Osgood 
Junction.  We reached the top of Mt. Madison at 6:07 AM, having hiked 4.1 
miles and gained 4100 ft. of elevation.
     Heartened by our relatively rapid ascent, thankful to have finished the 
longest single sustained elevation gain segment of the entire trip, and 
inspired by the grandeur of a completely unimpeded vista of the Great Gulf 
Wilderness, we took off along the Gulfside Trail of the Northern Presidential 
ridge, cranking out Mt Adams by 7:15, Mt Jefferson by 8:05, and Mt. 
Washington by 11:00.  We also did Mt. Clay (5533 ft.) along the way, 
obviously not named after a president, and, according to the AMC guidebook, 
not meeting the established criteria for an official 4000 footer, but serving 
in a Machiavellian manner of insulating us against accusations of being 
exclusively 4000 footer-baggers.

Episode 5: NEW TRENDS IN BACKCOUNTRY COSMETICS
     Upon reaching the top of Mt. Washington, we took shelter in the 
grandiose summit hut and therein found ourselves embroiled in a discussion 
concerning the purity of the extreme hiking experience.  One faction claimed 
that by indulging in the various foodstuff offerings at the cafeteria, one 
would degrade the self-sufficient ethos of the hardy hiker, who could 
otherwise exalt in performing the entire trip carrying everything in and 
everything out exclusively by foot.  However, another faction emerged which 
took issue with the notion of self-sufficiency, asserting that the ability to 
live off the land is a laudable goal in itself, including examples ranging 
from innocuous riverine water-usage to full-blown cafeteria exploitation.  In 
retrospect, it would have been interesting to have the nearly theological 
debate resolved into canon via the impartial and rational exercise of judging 
the most cohesive arguments of each faction.  However, the eventual outcome 
owed more to gastrointestinal urgings that eventually forced the most 
abstinent viewpoint to succumb.  And gladly succumb.
     During the ensuing feast we observed that Chrissy was sporting a 
fashionable new look that initially stretched beyond our ability to describe 
its salient features, much like the desired effect of a masterpiece from the 
reknown clothiers of Milan or Paris.  But upon further questioning, the 
apparent blue lipstick that had hitherto appeared so refreshingly avant-garde 
began to betray a physiological condition of concern.  "I'm really cold," she 
managed to say.  Now this was quite surprising to the rest of us, since 
Chrissy had once been the inspiration for a reference scale of toughness in 
which the most anyone else could hope for was a fraction of her ranking.  So 
was this the unwelcome toppling of a legend, akin to the shock such as would 
accompany a sudden revelation of Stalin's malevolence to those formerly held 
in the thrall of his propaganda?  Ah, but when we learned that beyond our 
recent fitful bat-crazed mini-slumber she had not slept for a week, being 
held hostage to a host of graduation-related events and academic endeavors, 
she regained her previous position at the pinnacle of human physical 
fortitude (perhaps now even more elevated) and became the recipient of some 
deserved gesticulations of homage and offerings of warm soup.

Episode 6: WE HAVE MET THE ENEMY, AND HE IS US, (NOT!)
     It is not, perhaps, an unreasonable conjecture that when the energies of 
the body compete to address the dual necessities of post-lunch digestion and 
the immediate task of hearty hiking, the suddenly extraneous faculties of 
benign garrulity fall into temporary decline.  In addition, a solemn 
realization of the nontrivial remaining distance may in some circumstances 
dampen even the kernel desire for communication.  While the preponderance of 
our party fell prey to this affliction, thankfully characterized more by its 
fugacity than stubborn longevity, one member provided ample evidence of her 
complete immunity.  Along the descent from the cafeteria on the Crawford path 
(according to the AMC guidebook the oldest continually maintained footpath in 
America), Amy revealed the second of her two infamous electronic devices, a 
handheld walkie-talkie.  Under the impression that her sister was 
concurrently on the Mt. Washington massif, as well as similarly equipped, Amy 
began a concerted effort to forge her familial link over the airwaves.  No 
extended period of static-filled non-reply could dissuade her from continual 
hailing attempts, which included (as desperation mounted) 
ritualistic-appearing poses and postures to establish optimum signal 
polarity.  While ultimately unsuccessful in their intended purpose, Amy's 
antics nevertheless enlivened the general mood.
     The uplift in temperament, however, did not propagate to such an extent 
that outlandish proposals smacking of insanity could be welcomed with 
unanimous advocacy.  To put this in the proper perspective, the cult of the 
impossible was fresh in several of our minds, as Rob and I had performed a 
decidedly non-introductory class extreme hike several weeks before.  And to 
that mindset the target of Mt. Isolation was tantalizingly close.  This 
desirable mountain, held in delectable regard by some circles as the pinnacle 
of 4000 footer remoteness, is never included in a technically "Presidential" 
traverse and usually demands of its suitors a dedicated journey that eschews 
any route commingling other peaks in the geographic vicinity.  Yet from our 
position near the AMC Lakes of the Clouds hut, it would only require an 
additional loop of 9+ miles and 2000 ft of elevation gain!  Technically this 
was doable, though akin to forcing the designers of the SR-71 Blackbird to 
achieve Mach 4 instead of Mach 3 - a very expensive proposition in monetary 
terms and especially so in our case where the currency was group morale.  So 
we refocused our goals on completing the "official" Presidential traverse 
with the understanding that our excess energy saved (from what a hypothetical 
detractor might label a wild goose chase) could be applied toward increasing 
the pleasurability index of the marginally more relaxful remaining journey.  
Thus, in concordance, we set off to complete the southern Presidentials, 
reaching Mt. Monroe at 1:20 PM.
     Now if there were any truism incontrovertibly applicable to all the 
members of our excursion, it would be the existence of an aggregate 
disposition characterized generously as "fairly competitive."  
Serendipitously channeling this subconscious propensity, an external threat 
materialized to our perceived collective awesomehood, thereby preserving our 
internecine tranquility.  This "threat" took the form of another gaggle of 
Presi-Traverse hikers that made outrageous claims of having started later 
than we did, yet obviously had made it to the same spot.  Were they faster, 
or just took less time for lunch?  We obviously yearned for the second 
alternative, and therefore made a semi-concerted effort to prove our 
hypothesis throughout the remainder of the traverse, subtly increasing our 
average velocity.  This carried us to Mt. Eisenhower, Mt. Pierce, and Mt. 
Jackson, but alas, upon arriving at each summit we would spy the "other" 
preparing to leave.  The belated realization that they were obviously older 
and "looked" more out-of-shape than ourselves did nothing to salve our 
wounded fanfaronade.  Thus, we set out to "enjoy" the remainder of our 
journey, that being an entirely different optimizing condition than the 
previous "conquest" mode.
     After Mt. Jackson, we took the Webster Cliff trail to Mt. Webster 
instead of taking the Webster-Jackson trail immediately, which would have led 
more directly to our final destination.  This turned out to be a good choice, 
since Mt. Webster, although less than 4000 ft., not named after a president, 
and thus arguably not part of the official traverse, provided some 
spectacular views across Crawford Notch.  Here we took advantage of the ample 
remaining daylight by sunning ourselves on the warm rock outcroppings like a 
variety of reptilian species.

Episode 7: A FAREWELL TO CLOTHES
     Saco lake greeted us at the end of our traverse like a lush oasis, 
providentially provided at the terminus of a trans-saharan peregrination.  
Its cool, fish-filled waters charmed everyone into doffing their mud-sweat 
boots, incidentally initiating a tournament to accolade the owner of the most 
extensively blistered feet. In this, Pat emerged with the dubious distinction 
of champion.  It is instructive to realize that footwear alone did not corner 
some repugnant monopoly on filth and grime, since our clothes and epidermal 
expanses also conspired to emit a resoundingly repulsive redolence.  The 
solution, for some, was to utilize the Saco as their own personal washbasin 
and waterland fun-playpen.
     Around the time of dusk we hobbled back to our escape vehicle parked at 
Crawford Notch, this being my green two-door.  Taking tactical advantage of 
my driver-mandated, safety-conscious dictum to preserve front-hemisphere 
visibility, Pat occupied the front-right passenger's seat without lap-borne 
interference, a concession, perhaps, to his most extensively injured 
ambulatory end-effectors.  The other six inadequately cleansed, yet 
adequately sore folk proceeded to cram themselves into the backseat, gaining 
firsthand experience of how food must have felt in the overstuffed belly of 
the gluttonous King Henry VIII.
     All told, everyone actually survived this introductory clinic to extreme 
hiking, a laudable finale that could someday serve as inspiration for future 
endeavors of backcountry dementia.

Andre' R. Girerd
