Trip Report: Rumney Climbing Trip  07-19-03
-------------------------------------------
MITOC mixed-level sport climbing trip to Rumney Crag in New Hampshire

Organizer:  Deb Fraser

Participants:  Nik Andersson, Catherine Cheung, Joe DeCiantis, 
               Vladimir Fedorov, Will Hawkins, Matt Ketterling,
               Ben Ketterling, Lorenzo Maccone, Igor Makarov, Chris McNeil,
               Chris Scott, Leslie Scott


Most of us set off for New Hampshire on Friday evening.  We were going
to stay overnight at Camelot Cabin in Rumney, and hit Rumney Crag on
Saturday morning.  Rick Abbot, Jason Lapenta, Solar Olugebefola, Chris
and Leslie Scott, and Nik were due to join us at the crag in the
morning.

I drove up, leaving from MIT, taking Joe, Catherine, and Will as my
passengers.  They were a funny bunch, making interesting conversation
on the way.  In particular, Joe and Catherine, who had met on the Rose
Ledge trip about a month earlier, had developed a love-hate
relationship.  One in which they would both make jokes at the expense
of the other, but really, you could just feel the love ;) This had
actually begun on the previous trip, when Joe was carrying a lot of
weight, probably 2 ropes, making his hike out a bit tougher.  So
Catherine made a suggestion that she should help him with his burden,
and of course this was jokingly taken as a knock against his manliness
(yeah it's a macho thing).

We saw the most gorgeous red-toned sunset from the highway in the
vicinity of Concord, which increased our spirits that we would have
nice weather the next day.  The drive went relatively smoothly until
driving along route 25 toward Rumney, when I saw blue lights in the
distance behind me.  My first instinct was to pull over, thinking that
it could be an emergency or perhaps I had made a mistake at the rotary
I had just passed?  The car behind me started to pull over too, but
then took off.  So it ended up that I got fined for the car that was
clocked as speeding behind me, and now I have to go to court to
straighten it out.  Not the best way to start off a trip, but let it
serve as a warning.  Turns out the town of Rumney was crawling with
police officers on patrol that weekend.  Is it because of the heavy
climber traffic?

Finally we got to the cabin, and as the keyholder, I let everyone in.
People unpacked their things and made themselves at home.  Joe and a
couple others spotted a mouse on the wall near the ladder to the loft.
(Yes, there are mice at Camelot, which is why we need to mouse-bag our
food on a branch in the kitchen).  So Joe pulled out his camera to
take pictures of it.  The mouse was confused by the commotion.  It
first popped into a little hole in wall and then came back out again
to check things out.  It came down and sat on top of the circuit
breaker box, where Joe got a prime picture of it.  Joe was also trying
to convince Catherine that we should called her "Cat" for short,
entitling her to go after the mouse.  She was not amused.  And of
course, it is best to keep away from the mice in case they are
carrying disease.  Before turning in for the night, I had all the
participants sign liability waiver forms (sign their souls away), and
attempted to divide the large group into three different climbing
teams for splitting up at the cliffs the next day, while others
discussed geometry and molecular biology on the white board behind me.
Little did I know that my effort would be in vain.

Next morning, we rose at 6:30 AM, with the plan to pack up and meet
the others at Rumney parking lot for about 7:30-7:45 AM.  Everything
went smoothly, and everyone was quick to help in cleaning up.  Chris
McNeil's carpool headed out early to make a pit-stop at Dunkin'
Donuts.  The rest of us arrived at the parking lot at just about 7:30,
and started to get organized.  I handed out club gear to those who
needed it, and we waited for the remaining Boston folk to arrive.  At
about 10 to 8, Nik arrived.  At about 5 to 8, with still no sign of
the others, we decided to head up to the Parking Lot Wall (the wall
closest to the parking lot) to start climbing, and the others knew to
look for us there.

Chris and Leslie showed up sometime during the first hour.  Turns out
that Rick and Jason did not show up at all that day.  I hoped that
nothing bad had happened to them.  I would learn later that Jason
ended up being too exhausted and not feeling well, and Rick had been
called into work at the last minute.  In their absence, we were a
little short of ropes, and one leader, but the group improvised very
well despite this.  We ended up splitting into two groups on the fly
instead of three.  After warming up at the Parking Lot Wall, roughly
half the group moved on to the Meadows area, as things started to get
busy with more people arriving at the cliffs.  The other half of us
stayed at Parking Lot Wall to finish working on a couple more climbs.
I was proud that I led "Chloe's Breakfast Special", a long and very
nice 5.8, for the first time, and very smoothly as well.  I also
helped coach Catherine, Igor, and Vladimir to do their first lead on "A
Week With Pete", a nearby 5.2 route.  Joe and I had our cameras out
and took pictures.

At about noon time, our group decided to head over to Jimmy Cliff, a
cliff much further out and up, which looked from the guidebook, like
it also had a good variety of route difficulty, 5.3 - 5.12.  I was
eager to check out this area, as I hadn't been there before.  It
turned out to be quite a hike for most of group, who were not used to
hiking, esp with heavy packs, as you need to hike a ways down the
road, and then up some steep terrain (maybe covering about a mile or
so total).  But they made it, and we found the multi-pitch bolted 5.3
slab route, "Clip A Dee Doo Dah", to be open.  So we starting setting
up, with Matt as our multi-pitch sport coach.

Matt and Joe teamed up to tackle the climb first.  Next Vladimir and
Igor went up, after the first team had moved on to the 2nd pitch.
Cathy and I went third.  As I approached the belay anchor between
pitch one and two, after leading the first pitch, Matt and Joe were on
their way down by rappel.  I thought to myself, would have been better
if they had just walked off to prevent criss-crossing the traffic
lines, but it wasn't a big deal since Matt, after all, knew what he
was doing.  They had anchored to the bolt above me, while I was at the
belay station, belaying Catherine up the first pitch.  Matt had left a
runner of draws at the belay station for us to use to hang back and
belay from.  As Catherine reached me, Matt and Joe had rappelled to
the bottom leaving their rappel anchor draws for Igor and Vladimir.
Here's where things got sticky.  Again, it would have been easier if
they'd walked off, but no, Igor and Vlad had to try rappelling after
the example of the first group.  (Next time, we'll have to remember to
communicate more clearly beforehand).  So Cathy and I were stuck at the
belay station, waiting for them to come down and free up the bolts
above us.  We passed the time, by admiring the gorgeous view from the
cliffside, and taking pictures.  You couldn't ask for better weather
to be stuck in a traffic jam on a cliffside.

Igor had come down and clipped into both draws at the rappel bolt
above us.  Vlad followed him down, and not sure what to do, decided it
would be easier to anchor to the bolt above Igor (they had asked me
for advice, but I was no help, although I realize now what they should
have done).  But then Vlad couldn't reach Igor, and they had trouble
switching off the rope for rappel.  Finally Matt free soloed up the
side of the climb to give much needed instruction.  Since he was
soloing, Catherine remarked that he looked like a monkey, and
suggested that he scratch his head.  He happily obliged to entertain
us, adding "Oook Oook" sound effects and all.  After Igor started
rappelling down, I began leading up the second pitch skipping past the
two bolts where Vlad was clipped in and cluttered with rappel anchor
draws.  Finally Catherine and I topped out and walked off -- to
prevent any more hassle with rappel.  The only problem was that
Cathy's shoes were too small for her, and her feet were really
hurting, so we had to take it slow on the descent.  Unfortunately,
because everything had taken so long, Ben and Will, the novices in our
group, did not get to try this climb.  But hopefully they still
enjoyed catching the views at least as we walked around the cliffs,
and the climbs they did earlier that day.  I myself didn't get in many
climbs that day, only 4, but it was a nice day just to be outside.

Then we headed back to the parking lot to meet up with the others.
Chris M. and Lorenzo, of the second group, had gotten in more climbing
and were satisifactorly worn out.  The rest had already left.  The
plan was to go swimming after the climb, but no one else, besides me,
was interested in dipping in the swimming hole in the Baker River
right near the cliffs.  (I don't know why, I like that little swimming
hole.)  So Chris McNeil's carpool which included Matt, Ben, and
Lorenzo just decided to head back.  The rest of us, Will, Catherine,
Joe, Vlad, Igor and I agreed to head to a nearby lake to swim.  But
the confusion did not end up on cliff!  My car was to follow Vlad's,
as they supposedly knew where they were going.  However, Will, who had
talked to them about the lake, while I was at the bathroom, thought
they were referring to Stinson Lake which was several miles up the
road from Rumney town center.  However, as we followed them, they
started heading in the opposite direction!  So then we stopped to turn
around and waited for them to come back, which they did.  Finally we
worked it out that they had been talking about some other lake further
off the I-93 highway, and we decided we would go to Stinson Lake
instead as it was undoubtedly closer.

We saw a sign for "Public Waters Ahead" as we approached the lake, but
didn't see the public lake access as we drove past it, just private
homes and docks.  Then we turned around and parked on the side of the
road behind some cars that were parked obviously for some big party at
this one house.  We walked up the lakeshore toward the group of locals
camped out in lawn chairs in front of their dock, to ask them where
the public access to the water was.  One said they thought we had
passed it, down the other end of the lake.  But then they invited us
to use their dock and lakeshore.  One man said jokingly "Just say
you're one of the family, no one will ever know."  They told us to
even help ourselves to the floaty toys if we wanted, and asked us if
we wanted anything to eat.  Apparently it was some multi-generation
party.  We accepted their hospitality to swim, with immense gratitude,
but couldn't take their food.  We asked what the occasion was.  "Say
Happy Birthday to my mother", said one of the women.  Looks like we
crashed Grandma's birthday party.  The water was really refreshing,
not to mention fun, jumping and diving off the docks.  Not wanting to
overstay our welcome, and as Catherine was starving, we headed into
shore after about 20 minutes.  We said thank you, again wishing
Grandma Happy Birthday.  Joe slyly added, "So, you must be turning
what, 45 this year?"  There was a chuckle from the crowd, and we were
welcomed to come back to the lake anytime ;) The family asked us where
we were from, and we told them that we were in town from Boston for
climbing, and they were asking us about that, esp. as one woman has a
brother whom might like to climb up there.  Very nice people.  If we
ever have lakeside property, we need to be that hospitable.

Joe offered us blueberries in the car to tide us over for dinner.
Bless him, they were really good.  We headed out to Plain Jane's Diner
on Rte 25 for dinner.  A neat little place with good hearty food at
modest prices, so even poor grad students, on their meager budget of
$12/week for luxury items (as Joe informed us, and this was an ongoing
joke) can afford it.  Just in case you're wondering, "Chicken a la
King", the special that night, is a bed of mashed potatoes covered
with chicken stew.  After dinner, with a ratio of 4 to 2, the girls
actually had to wait for the guys to finish in the bathroom!  Back at
the car, the remainder of Joe's pint of blueberries was on the dash.
So I stole a few and put the container back quickly before he came.
He joins us at the car, and completely unaware of what had just
transpired, says "Anybody want some more blueberries?"  In an overly
innocent tone, I respond, "Oh yes, I'd love some!"  Then he adds, "You
can have the rest if you want, I'm stuffed."  What a guy ;)

View trip pictures at: http://www.wildmountain.net/ under "MITOC
Trips"

Deb













