Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA22474; Tue, 27 Jan 98 09:41:09 EST
Received: from MIT.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA09664; Tue, 27 Jan 98 09:39:49 EST
Received: from MASSBAY.MIT.EDU by MIT.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA20576; Tue, 27 Jan 98 09:39:38 EST
Message-Id: <2.2.32.19980127143642.0095be10@po7.mit.edu>
X-Sender: sfitzger@po7.mit.edu
X-Mailer: Windows Eudora Pro Version 2.2 (32)
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Date: Tue, 27 Jan 1998 09:36:42 -0500
From: Scott FitzGerald <sfitzger@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Intervale Ski Trip Report

The trip started out in a complete downpour. Scott Stuart had already
decided to cancel his trip do to the predicted rain and wind and treacherous
road conditions (more on this later). However, our group of six decided to
continue on. We met at MITOC around 6:00 and were on the road by 6:30 after
a quick stop at Home Depot for some cabin supplies. Using the antique
technology of the trucker, the CB radio we were able to communicate between
both trucks.

Interstate 95 proved to be particuarly treacherous. Luckily most people
seemed to have stayed home and there was minimal traffic. The road surface
was a great combination of slush, ice, water, and snow. We plundered on at
45 mph and called in about 3 vehicles which had slid into the ditch. Then
the exciting part of the evening came. A driver in a Honda CRV went whipping
by at about 60 mph and executed a Boston Turn (signaled left, went right)
and literally drove across all four lanes of the road, spun around, hit the
snow berm on the right shoulder, and then rolled down the slope, finally
coming to rest at the bottom upright and unharmed. We stopped to lend
assistance and after finding out that the driver was unhurt called for a tow
truck, for which the driver was very ungrateful. He said he could get a tow
truck cheap from the next exit. However, we couldn't take him there because
we were loaded up. He said never mind he'd walk the 2 miles, in 20 degree
weather, in his denim jacket, in the raining ice! I left him for Darwin to
take care of and called the state police to come check on him.

Once on route 16 the ice turned to snow and we had a great drive in North
Conway. However, because of the slow drive the Stop and Shop was closed and
we couldn't get our groceries (they USED to be 24 hours). However, the
parking lot was empty and had a good 4-6" of fresh snow on top and some neat
snow berms to one side. The drivers then started to execute and dazzling
array of spins, slides, and jumps through and around the snow! Talk about
fun... After stopping to clear the accumulation of snow and ice from the
windscreen we proceeded to the cabin. 

There was about 8" of snow on the road to the cabin and about 2 feet drifted
up next to it. We humped the gear in, fired up the heater, brought some
water in from the spring (which entailed a dizzying sled ride down the hill
with Helen and myself only coliding with one tree) and went to bed. Helen,
Otto, and Tim slept out in the yurt and reported a chilly sleep. 

The next morning we awoke around 8:00 to slightly overcast skies, warm
temperatures (~30) and no ice accumulation as had been forcast. Otto and Tim
decided that the 4" of fresh snow were too good to pass up and opted to go
downhill skiing at Attitash. The rest of us stopped at the market, picked up
the groceries and set off to snowshoe to the top of Doubleback Mountain,
opposite Mt. Washington. However, upon reaching the parking lot we discoved
that it hadn't been plowed and there were no spots left. I proceeded to
drive my truck into a 32" snow bank (as measured to the tops of my tires) to
create a parking spot, while Matt simply jammed his truck against a 5' high
wall of snow and exited the passenger side.

The trail was crisscrossed by fallen trees and branches which made for slow
hiking, but the trail was well packed by a previous group who had stayed at
the Doubleback cabin the night before. It was very beautiful to see the ice
covered trees and awe inspiring to see all of the damage. As the day went on
the warm temperatures created projectiles out of the falling ice and the
last 45 minutes of the trip was spent getting rained on by dripping trees
and dodging ice bullets. However, we were rewarded at the top of the
mountain with clear views all the way into Maine across the snow covered
hills. On the way back down the clouds lifted and we could see across the
Mt. Washington valley and for a moment could see the weather station on top!
We also met a group of 15 Boy Scouts who at the bottom had pulled into the
parking lot behind us at 12:00 and couldn't find a parking spot. They had
spent the next 3 hours digging, by hand, spots to park there cars. These
kids were crazy. They all had huge packs on and most were pulling a sled
filled with more stuff and firewood. All for one night in a cabin. The
leaders were bringing up the rear, one with a 6" high pack which was sure to
get stuck on every tree branch crossing the trail, and another pulling a
tandem, yes tandem, sled arrangement. We wished them luck knowing that they
would not reach the top until well after dark.... At least they were all
dressed appropriately.

On the way back to the cabin to do a little sledding we spotted a snow
tubing area at the Black Mountain ski area in Jackson. For 5 dollars they
give you a tube and let you slide on a groomed hill about 300' high.
However, the great part is that they have a pony tow to haul you up the hill
in the tube. No walking required. After about an hour of tubbing we were
done and got together for one last run. We hooked up all four tubes (Matt,
Helen, Carolyn, and myself) and took off down the hill. More people, means
more speed. At the bottom of the hill they have a large ski jump type berm
to stop you. They warn you that they will take your tube away if you go over
it. Well we flew right over it in a gigantic fit of laughter! The worker
there wasn't real happy, but what was he going to do..., throw us out?
Anyway, everybody at the bottom congratulated us on our run and sent us on
our way.

We picked up Otto and Tim from the ski resort, where they had a great day
and Tim beat himself up trying to learn how to snowboard, and headed back to
the cabin for dinner. Dinner was fantastic. We had a spicy baked chicken
(due to TIm who put the spice container opening on pour instead of
sprinkle), baked potatoes and broccoli. For desert we had popcorn along with
a game of Eucher (sp?). 

The next morning we awoke at 6:00, packed up and cooked a big breakfast of
toasted bagel, egg and cheese sandwiches. We then all headed off to Attitash
for a great day of skiing. The sky was slightly overcast and it was very
windy. However, the snow was in great shape (for New England anyway) and the
temperature was perfect. Everyone had a complete ball, nobody ended up in
the first aid room, and a lot of practical jokes occuried. The prize for the
best wreck goes to Matt who launched off of a small berm and promptly had
his skiis and poles abandon him. He was able to apply a modified self-arrest
towards the bottom of the hill ("thank god, I went to that lecture") and
stop his 300 foot slide.

We then made record time getting home, taking a little under 3 hours and
only missing one quarter of the super bowl, which we all watched from my
house and ordered pizza from across the street. All in all it was a
fantastic trip!!!

Misc.

Lessons Learned:

1.) Yes, polypro smells real bad after you've worn it for a few days.
However, polyester smells pretty foul as well, especially when Tim is still
in it. 

2.) 4WD is handy, especially in snow covered parking lots.

3.) Black pepper comes out of the container quite quickly when its on pour...


Quote of the trip:

"Who cares for my sausage" -from Carolyn during the super bowl.

--
-----------------------------------------------------
Scott FitzGerald

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sea Grant College Program
292 Main St. E38-300
Cambridge, MA  02139

(617) 253-9311 (work),  (617) 252-1615 (fax)
(617) 441-5307 (home)

sfitzger@mit.edu
http://web.mit.edu/sfitzger/www

