Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA12259; Thu, 29 Jan 98 18:41:17 EST
Received: from LL.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA07456; Thu, 29 Jan 98 18:39:31 EST
Received: by ll.mit.edu (4.1/LL-1.3) id AA29240; Thu, 29 Jan 98 18:39:28 EST
Return-Path: <abbot@ll.mit.edu>
Message-Id: <9801291839.AA16251@LL.MIT.EDU>
From: "Abbot, Richard" <abbot@ll.mit.edu>
Subject: Belated Franconia Ridge TR
Date: Thu, 29 Jan 98 18:39:27 -0500
X-Priority: 3
X-Mailer: Internet Mail Service (5.0.1457.3)

	Trip summary of the Franconia Ridge winter school trip on Sunday
1/25.

	This hike involves a 8.1 mile loop, 1.67 miles of it are on an
exposed ridge between Mt. Lafayette over Mt. Lincoln and to Haystack
Mountain.  On a clear day this ridge offers spectacular views in all
directions and along the ridge itself.  Winter conditions on the ridge
are expected to be windy with mixed conditions of hard pack and deep
drifting snow, rock, and ice.  The ridge offers sustained above treeline
hiking but with emergency shelter in the trees just a few hundred yards
off of the ridge.  The recommended route is up the steep Falling Waters
Trail, north across the ridge, down from Mt. Lafayette to the Greenleaf
Hut and continuing down the Old Bridle Path to start.  With high winds
from the NW, the reverse direction is recommended.

	A hearty crew of 5 others including James, Luke, Mark, Matt, and
Tarjei first impressed me with a rather snore free night at Camelot.
They further impressed me as being strong, experienced, but mellow
winter hikers.  A 6:00 am rise yielded an 8:30 start time at the trail -
we obviously dallied at places like the Dunkin Donuts in Plymouth.  The
trail up the Old Bridle Path to the Greenleaf Hut was well packed with
only boots required.  On this part of the hike we encountered several
parties, one even having a bit of tea trailside.  The final stretch up
the Mt. Lafayette summit cone led some to use crampons (otherwise
perhaps self arrest practice) but the crampons were only required on a
short stretch and it was otherwise rather rocky for them.  The wind made
the final summit section pretty easy, not too often have I been blown up
a summit cone.  The ridge crossing was quite windy as is common and
gusts in places led to a random walk in places.  For relief one could
easily drop down the east side of the ridge, and there were also
occasional rock bands for a moment of calm.  There were no views except
for the ghost of a fellow hiker - visibility was about 50 yards so we
kept each other in sight.  It didn't seem to be that cold given the wind
chill although the lenses did pop out of one member's glasses.

	On descent, the Falling Waters trail had been post-holed, so
some of us used snowshoes and greatly improved the condition of that
trail.  The blowdowns weren't too bad on the ascent Bridle Path, but
several were encountered in the waterfall area of the descent.  Perfect
timing with the 6:00 am wakeup, as we arrived at the cars just at dark.

	For future hikers, unless there is new snow, the hike can be
done in boots, except for the few short stretches near the summit of
Lafayette where crampons might be useful.  The drifts on the ridge are
not sustained enough to warrent snowshoes as there is too much bare
rock.  The ridge trail is marked with large cairns and the path is in
many places lined with rocks.  But it would be recommended that at least
one member of a group be well familiar with this ridge, especially so as
not to waste time in high wind and poor visibility conditions.

	Maybe see you up there next winter.
	Rick

