Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA15822; Tue, 21 Jan 97 14:28:42 EST
Received: from CACCIATORE.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA19892; Tue, 21 Jan 97 14:27:49 EST
From: jcrost@MIT.EDU
Received: by cacciatore.MIT.EDU (5.57/4.7) id AA26437; Tue, 21 Jan 97 14:27:44 -0500
Message-Id: <9701211927.AA26437@cacciatore.MIT.EDU>
Cc: wrivers125@aol.com
Subject: Winterschool TR -- Carter Notch
Date: Tue, 21 Jan 1997 14:27:40 EST


	Standing in the grey shadows around the tents, I can see that the 
sunlight through the notch reaches just the top six feet of a birch at the
edge of our campsite.  The dawn light turns the birch top a bright orange, 
making everything in our camp colorlessness in comparison.  I know that the
sunlight will slowly advance down the tree, eventually reaching the tents and
warming us a few very welcome degrees.  The thermometer reports minus fifteen
Farenheit.  The same light illuminates the fantastic cliffs on the visible
side of Wildcat Mountain, but my eye keeps being drawn back to the small 
birch.

	Our group, consisting of Chris, Liz, Joel, Martha, Janis, Carl, Matt,
and Jen, had hiked up the Nineteen Mile Brook Trail the day before, and found
a place to shovel out pits for the tents just below Carter Notch.  The long
evening of cooking and snow-melting was spent almost entirely in sleeping
bags as the temperature dropped from zero to minus ten.  Everyone so looked
forward to hot food that no one cared what the T.V.P. in T.V.P. chili stood
for.  I had expected the olive oil to turn into sludge, but not into the icy
solid that I eventually gave up on trying to hack out of the mini-Nalgene.
Next time I'll bring butter.  Hot chocolate was passed back and forth between
the tents depending on whose stove was boiling faster and who had some hot
chocolate powder left.

	On Sunday morning there is the customary schism between those who
want to dive out of the tents and get going to warm up, and those who want
to stay in their sleeping bags until sun hits the tents and a warm 
breakfast hits their stomachs.  We discuss whether to try the steep trail
up to the top of Carter Dome or just head back down our trail to the cars.
Personally, I am worried about sweating and gasping my way up a difficult 
trail with a full pack in this cold.  I also have little confidence in my
car starting, and want to get the ordeal of waiting for a tow truck started
as early as possible.

	So we take one last trip through Carter Notch, to the lakes and the hut
and the views of the rocky sides of Wildcat and Carter Dome, shoulder our packs
and head down the trail.  With an easy hike out and no reason to hurry, we take
extra time to watch the scenery and talk with our fellow hikers heading up the 
trail to the notch we just left.

	It turned out both cars started without hesitating.  In my case I
attribute it to 5-W-30 oil.  Next time I won't worry.

Chris 

PS: If anyone else from the trip would like to comment, he should feel more 
than welcome to.

