Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA28258; Mon, 2 Feb 98 17:46:54 EST
Received: from M2-225-8.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA01490; Mon, 2 Feb 98 17:43:30 EST
Received: by m2-225-8.MIT.EDU (940816.SGI.8.6.9/4.7) id RAA09470; Mon, 2 Feb 1998 17:43:16 -0500
Message-Id: <199802022243.RAA09470@m2-225-8.MIT.EDU>
Cc: shooshan@jhu.edu, arousx98@wfu.edu, danagu@cebaf.gov,
        avakyan@lx2.yerphi.am
Subject: Mt. Washington
Date: Mon, 02 Feb 1998 17:43:16 EST
From: Areg Danagoulian <aregjan@MIT.EDU>


At the begining of the month Mt. Washington was on the list of the
MITOC activities.  However, as IAP neared its end and the MITOC leaders
sunk in reasearch, the chances of a MITOC trip became very slim.  Thus
three of us -- me, Todd, and Francois -- decided to do it on our own.
I myself had climbed Mt. Washington this summer, however in "sweet" weather
conditions -- 50-60mph wind, 33F, rain, 5-10m visibility.  My clothing then was far from 
being adequate -- shorts, windpants, sweater, a trash bag immitating a 
windbreaker-rainjacket (I trusted the *&^@#$ weather forecast!!).  However, 
under the courageous leadership of Alexey Maznev (who himself was dressed 
for beach conditions) we reached the summit in 3h (starting from Tuckerman)
and came down without all body parts intact.  So, that much about summer. 
Now, the winter story...

We leave Boston on Saturday morning, and at 2:00pm are at Pinkham Notch. It takes us
~2h to get to Harvard cabine, where we stay for the night. We leave our packs at the
cabine, and head toward Huntington Ravine to train Francois some self arrest techniques
and to practice it ourselves, in order to make sure that we put the right instrument
into the snow.  However as the sun sets, we rather chose a steep section
of a trail and use it as training grownd.  We finally head back to the cabine after
making sure that our clothes are 100% water-saturated and that our very underwears are filled
with snow.  The evening is far from being borring, as the cabin fills up with different
people, including some Qebequois and an Ukrainian climber.  So now I have to speak English, French,
and Russian in the same time.  In short -- the evening passes in a very jolly atmosphere.
The Ukrainian guy turns out to be a climber of "first degree."  As clarification, the
Soviet school of climbing includes a rating of an alpinist's level of "expertise" -- 
"pin carrier" (someone who has completed one summer course at alpine camp,i.e. climbing training
camps), 3rd degree, 2nd degree, 1st degree, Master of Sports, Honorary Master of Sports.
A 1st degree climber for example would be allowed to participate in a 7day vertical mixed climb.
Alexey himself planed to solo ice climb in Huntington next day.  He shows us these strange
ice tools that I have never seen or heard before -- Ice Fifis.  These are basically two big
hooks which you place(and not bang) on ice, and as you hang on them with your weight they
sink into ice.  According to Alexey they are much easier to use and more efficient on certain 
types of ice, especially overhangs. Also they are quite easy to make (you basically can make
them in a machine shop). The idea of these Fifis is French, but are produced and used
only in Russia. 

In the morning we wake up around 6:00am.  I have slept very badly, and am very glad that the
night is finally over.  We take off around 7:45 and take the Lion's Head Trail.  Around 9:00 we
are at Lion's Head, which is at 5000ft (Mt. Wash. is 6200ft).  The weather is like in a fairy
tale -- sunny, not a cloud, very light wind.  The temperature is hight, but not above 0C, so
the snow doesn't stick to our crampons (I now think that the crampons were an overkill).
As we come out of forest we start seing the first views.  During the night the clowds have 
decended into the notch, and below us we see this ocean of clouds, stretching untill horizon,
only the mountains sticking out of it.  White snow, black rocks and deep blue (close
to violet) sky make such a combination of colors and lights that one might suspect his friends
of placing LSD in his food.  The weather is waaaay to great for this mountain.  The wind
speed is not above a breeze.  This is idiot's luck I am telling myself (i.e. you are sooo lucky 
that you feel like an idiot).  Or as Francois speculates his beginer's luck has spread on all of
us.  And indeed this is the first winter hike for Francois.  However you woun't say that if you see
how he outruns both me and Todd.  I guess adventure racing is a good training for mountaineering.
We reach the summit around 11:30.  Fantastic views, summit euphoria. We get to the summit
mark, and light the stove on the windiest(approved) point of the earth.  Cool, eh? :)
More people come up, more Quebecois, we make soup, eat, drink, man, woman, 
until this Snow-Cat appears from nowhere and chases 
us out of the summit.  We basically run down the slope of the mountain, occasionally buttsliding
until the first branches start sticking out of the snow. We get to the Cabin in ~1hr, 
where we meet Alexey.  It took us 3.75hrs
by Lion's Head trail.  It took him that + 1hr to ice climb through Huntington and run up 
to the summit.
Wee pack up and get to the parking lot around 3:30, since we were planing to stop at IME.
Overall the trip was easy, especially concidering the weather.  Maybe next time
we'll have some honest conditions with 50mph and -30C.  But that's a question of luck. :)

On our way back to Boston we see this car with the following stupid bumper-sticker "This car
has climbed Mt. Washington."
