Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA24869; Wed, 30 Apr 97 23:36:18 EDT
Received: from MARINARA.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA15228; Wed, 30 Apr 97 22:32:55 EST
From: nemesis@MIT.EDU
Received: by marinara.MIT.EDU (5.57/4.7) id AA24643; Wed, 30 Apr 97 23:33:28 -0400
Message-Id: <9705010333.AA24643@marinara.MIT.EDU>
Subject: Spring Circus Hikes (x2), trip reports
Date: Wed, 30 Apr 1997 23:33:26 EDT

Trip #1:  Old Bridle Path up Mt. Lafayette, Sat 19 April

Personnel:  Johanne Auerbock, Anne Dwojeski, Ivo Grosse, Elena Meeker, 
            Jim Reardon, Luke Sosnowski, Adrian Soviani, Emmett Witchell,
            Evy Yeo

It had been raining all day Friday, and the further north we drove, the
harder fell the rain.  How could we hope to hike the next day?  There is
nothing worse than hiking through a cold rain, unless it is post-holing
through slush, and when we arrived at Camelot to find two feet of snow 
still on the ground our prospects did not appear bright.

During the night the sound of rain diminished until the roar of Camelot's
brook could be heard from the front porch.  By the time we had shuttled
the boaters to the put-in point of a truly tremendous Baker River (for what
was to be an unusually quick float trip, due to the high, swift, and smooth
water) the sun and the blue sky were entering, stage West.  We should now
be clear of precipitation unless we outraced it by driving East too quickly.
Where would the threat of slush be least?

At perhaps 1 pm we found ourselves at the Old Bridle Path trailhead, just
off Rt. 93 in Franconia Notch.  We had snowshoes, but would gamble that
at this, the highest of the easily accessible trailheads, we would find
firm snow, and so we left them behind.  Of course, since we did not take
crampons either, the first patch of ice would force the party to turn
around; yet there is a reason that the Bridle Path is "Old", for out of
all the routes in Franconia Notch, this is the one that gains the most
spectacular views at the lowest elevations.

The snow held, and not much more than an hour later we emerged from the
trees to find the vastness of Walker Ravine clear before us, with blue
skies directly above and the lesser summits of Franconia Ridge clear
to the South.  We skirted the ravine along excellent footing and found
no problem with drifting snow in the little trees there.  As we ascended
it became clear that what had been rain lower down had fallen here as powder
snow, enough to make a carpet over the ice for us to walk on but not
enough to make walking difficult.  We arrived at the Greenleaf hut a
little before 4 pm.

After a hiker's lunch to leeward of the hut, we dropped packs and continued
on to get a taste of what conditions were like above treeline.  As we left
the last of the trees we found a band of a few hundred yards where the
windpacked snow was not firm enough for good walking, and above that nothing
but ice-coated rocks.  The wind came up as we rose.  To the north was
a tumultuous sky, and once or twice I heard high above what might have been
the cry of some bird, though we found almost no other animal sign the whole
day.  We stopped on top of some knob a few hundred feet below the summit
for a group picture, and headed back down, hoping to arrive at the cabin
before dinner got cold.


Thanks to Luke for co-leading the trip, and most especially and also to
all those people on the hike, who, having never been on a MITOC trip before,
had no idea what to expect, and yet remained good-natured and intent on
enjoying the day even when uncertainty reigned.


Day 2:  Mt. Cardigan  20 April 

Personnel:  Jesse Darley, Anne Dwojeski, Ivo Grosse, Markus Leiendecker,
            Haiyang Liu, Joshua Napoli, Jim Reardon, Luke Sosnowksi, 
            Adrian Soviani, Evy Yeo

 

Sunday started warm and sunny, and still.  This was the Circus Sunday trip 
for those who "had to get back to Boston", so inevitably we headed for Mt.
Cardigan.  You would think, from driving the back roads that lead from Camelot
to Mt. Cardigan, that New Hampshire had not yet been discovered by tourists.
Of course when we arrived at the parking lot of the AMC lodge it was full
of Bostonian Saabs and Volvos, for this is the closest mountain to Boston
that is not Mt. Monadnock.  We were to do an easygoing counter-clockwise
loop, heading up and over the Firescrew and across the ridge to the summit.
In the lower elevations the trail was snow-free, though there was enough snow
on the shoulders of the Firescrew to fuel what looked like an urgent civil 
snowball fight, that had erupted within the ranks of the hiking group ahead 
of us, and through which we were granted safe-passage as unarmed neutrals.

Attaining the Firescrew we found extremely clear skies to the North, through
which the Presidential range could be seen, and some haze to the south.  We 
stopped for a leisurely lunch on some sun-drenched rocks.  Most of the rest
of the way was clear of snow, and even dry, the exception being the belt of
woods just before the final climb to the top.  Just under the fire tower
we had yet another leisurely lunch on some more sun-drenched rocks.

We chose the Alexandria Ski Trail for the descent.  The folks from Alexandria,
being not fools, put their ski trail in a ravine in which the snow collects.
We had hoped that descent of this trail would be an enjoyable mixture of
plunge-stepping and butt-sliding, with just enough face-planting thrown in
to keep the party's spirits up, but the snow was too soft and we post-holed.
Our miseries were nothing compared to what must have been suffered by the 
moose which had preceded us down.  "They're not well-designed animals," said 
Jesse, contemplating yet another 5-foot deep hoof-shaped hole.  

There was still some snow left when we got off the slope and began following
(and falling in) the brook back to the lodge, but it was clear that we had
gotten the best hiking out of a New England Spring, and that soon the snow
would be gone and the bugs would be out.    






