Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA16303; Tue, 8 Jul 97 11:45:37 EDT
Received: from MECHA.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA29311; Tue, 8 Jul 97 11:41:49 EDT
Message-Id: <9707081541.AA29311@MIT.EDU>
Received: by mecha.mit.edu id AA02307g; Tue, 8 Jul 97 11:40:41 EDT
Date: Tue, 8 Jul 97 11:40:41 EDT
From: Ross Levinsky <ross@mecha.mit.edu>
To: jamie@MIT.EDU
Cc: alissa@leland.Stanford.EDU, anjay@ideo.com,
        mochoa@leland.stanford.edu, Don@mecha.mit.edu, dsi@MIT.EDU,
        udu00127@email.sjsu.edu, levinsky1@juno.com
Subject: backpacking in New England - response/trip report

Hi,

I just came back from a trip to Mt. Carrigain in the Whites. It doesn't
meet all of your requirements, but will probably do the trick.
Carrigain has an observation tower at the top, which gives the best
views I've seen in NH (better than Franconia Ridge, and better than
Bondcliff/Bond/Guyot, IMHO). 

On Saturday we drove up to 302, and parked at the gated entrance to
Sawyer River (Brook? Creek?) Road. This is a dirt road that looks
passable on the maps, and is described as such in the latest AMC guide,
but is actually closed because of a major washout. So...

We left the car at the road beginning, and hiked 2 miles up the road to
the Signal Ridge Trail. We then marched about 2 miles up the
SRT, to just past the intersection with the Carrigain Brook (Creek?
River? Notch?) trail. It's a very flat area, so you will have no problem
heading off into the woods to find a legal campsite (200 feet from
trails, water, etc.).

On Sunday, we left everything unnecessary in the woods at the campsite,
and headed up the SRT 3.2 miles to the summit of Carrigain. Judging from
the contour lines, it's about a 2500 foot elevation gain, so it's
grinding but not dangerous or overly unpleasant.  After 3 hours we made
it to the observation tower, and found a party of "roving" Forest
Service rangers at the top. That was nice, because they knew the names
of every mountain and body of water. You can see virtually every peak in
the Whites from the summit of Carrigain, with a completely unencumbered,
360-degree view.

We stayed up there and had lunch for about 2 hours, while more people
filtered in. There were about 10 when we left. It took us 2 hours to get
down to base camp, and then about 1.5 hours to hike back out to the car.

All told, it was 4 miles the first day, and 10 the second. Perhaps a bit
lighter than you're looking for, but a nice workout for the
less-experienced members of your party.

If you're looking for more distance and want to flirt with the camping
rules, there are a bunch of campsites near the top of Carrigain (from
about 2+ miles up from the junction of the Signal Ridge and Carrigain
Brook/Creek/Notch trails). The rangers told us that there were a few
legal spots near the top, where "legal" is again defined as more than
200 feet from the main trail.

The nearest of these camps is approximately 7 UPHILL miles from the
road, so do not undertake this lightly. I don't think I'd do it, myself.

Anyway, if you do camp high, you could get over Carrigain and down the
death-defying Desolation Trail (extremely steep and difficult to
descend, reputedly) for 2 miles, then head about 5 miles back around the
mountain on the aforementioned Carrigain Brook/Creek/Notch trail,
to the area in which we camped. It's then 4 miles more out to the car.

All told, that would be 7 miles in, and almost 12 miles out. It would be
a very long slog, and I'd think carefully before committing to it.

Water is abundant at the lower elevations, and there are a few trickling
streams halfway up Carrigain. There is reputedly a well near the top,
but the water requires filtering/treatment.

The big problem with the hike is THE BUGS. My, oh my. Brutal. There is
no other word for it. We had mosquito nets for our heads for the lower
elevations of the Signal Ridge trail, and were liberally slathered with
100% DEET, and we're STILL covered with bug bites. You get the best of
both worlds at the moment - black flies and mosquitoes. If you can deal
with them, go. If not, wait a month and then go.

I hope this is useful to you. If you have questions, please email me.



				Ross Levinsky






