Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA08775; Tue, 10 Feb 98 20:26:23 EST
Received: from MIT.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA17478; Tue, 10 Feb 98 20:25:12 EST
Received: from MASSBAY.MIT.EDU by MIT.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA13097; Tue, 10 Feb 98 20:24:54 EST
Message-Id: <2.2.32.19980211012532.00fa32f4@po7.mit.edu>
X-Sender: sfitzger@po7.mit.edu
X-Mailer: Windows Eudora Pro Version 2.2 (32)
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Date: Tue, 10 Feb 1998 20:25:32 -0500
From: Scott FitzGerald <sfitzger@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Mt. Washington Trip Report

This trip officially started on Thursday night when everyone met for a
pre-trip meeting to go over equipment, expectations, skills, and to fit
crampons. Our group consisted of 15 hardy people led by Scott Stuart
(Camelot Manager), Jesse Darley (President), Luke Sosnoski (BOD member),
Bill Finger (Desk Manager) and myself. Most of the group had been on the
previous trips to the White Mountains this January and all were looking
forward to the attempt.

The group left Friday night around 7:00 except for my car which stayed for a
late comer. Every arrived up at the cabin by 10:30 and we all squeezed in
and fell asleep by 11 or so. Aplologies must go to Ulandt Kim and his
friends who were also staying in the cabin with us. Not only did we crowd
them in but we awoke at 0-dark early (4:00 am) to get going. Amazingly
enough everyone was able to get up and get ready in under 45 minutes. This
included following the lessons from Winter School and fueling up with high
sugar / fat contents foods (we had supplied 3 dozen Dunkin Doughnuts!)

We arrived at Pinkham notch around 5:30 am and proceeded to put on boots and
organize our packs for the trip up. The weather was forecasted to be warm
(30s) with calm winds. After some diddling around and numerous trips back to
the cars to put away shoes and equipment we hit the trail at 6:15 just as
the sky was beginning to brighten.

We headed up the road to Tuckerman's Ravine and were treated to a beautiful
sunrise around 6:45. It produced an incredible red glow on the summits of
Washington's ravines. After pausing to admire the marvelous beauty
surrounding us and to remove layers we continued up the trail. At the bottom
of the Lion's Head Winter Route we stopped in the sun to put on crampons. We
only had difficulty with one pair and had everybody ready to go in about 10
minutes. 

The Lion's Head trail proved to be difficult both due to its steepness and
the isolated patches of ice. However, everyone made good use of their ice
axes and crampons and chugged right up (except for myself  who seemed to
snag my pack on every overhanging branch the whole way).

At the top of the Lion's Head trail friendly arguments as to how much
elevation gain we had made necessitated pulling out the map. The top of
Lions' head is almost 5000 feet if I recall so we'd just done about 3/4 of
the total elevation gain (Mt. Washington is about 6,000 feet high and
Pinkham Notch is around 1000) and had covered about 3 miles. After removing
more layers, eating, drinking,  and slathering on the sunscreen to ward of
the hot sun we again moved up the mountain. 

At this point Darrel decided that he was just to hot for his clothing and
proceeded to remove his shirt to hike only in his bottoms. The rest of us
simply sweated in our long underwear (which was the only thing most of us
wore at this point). You could smell the sweat soaking into the polypro
(yuck). It was close to 40 degree and clear as a whistle. As we proceeded up
the Alpine Garden around the top of Tuckermans you could see all the way to
Maine. Absolutely gorgeous. 

We stopped at the top of Tuckermans for pictures and to comment on who was
going to ski it in the spring (I'm game... who else wants to go?). We were
passed by a couple of MIT alums (not MITOC members though) and had a
friendly conversation. At this point we had our only real casualty of the
day. Luke managed to get a small blister started on his foot from the
plastic boots and stopped to put on some moleskin. The rest of us continued
up the mountain waiting for Luke, Jesse and Jen just before the final push
to the summit. It was a long wait because these three decided that the large
steep snow field going up off the Alpine Garden would make a great spot to
glissade and practise self-arresting. After they caught up with us we all
continued to the summit.

Upon reaching the summit around 11:30 there were whoops of joy combined with
the rustling of packs as people dug out their windbreakers and food. We
fired up a stove to make hot chocolate and people ate and looked at the
incredible view. It was about 30 degrees with a light breeze and we had 95
mile visibility. We could see all the way to the Atlantic Ocean! The whole
presidential range looked glorious!!

After ooohing and aaahing at the view and the great weather someone who
shall go nameless (our president) suggested that we take a picture at the
summit with our shirts off. (Stay tuned to the MITOC web page for the
pictures). This provided a lot of amusement for the observatory staff and
members of the educational tour that was on top. I think we made it onto at
least 3 videos and more cameras than I can count.

We then saddled up around 12:30 and started down the mountain towards the
Boot Spur Trail. After about 15 feet we decided that crampons weren't
necessary and removed them for what would be the rest of the trip. We had a
long hike down the summit cone and across the top of Tuckermans Ravine to
the Boot Spur Trail. It was really hot out and the trail alternated between
hard ice and soft drifts. You never really knew what the next step would be
like. 

After some prodding from the group we stopped at the Boot Spur trail
junction above Tuckermans to watch a few snowboarders travel down the ravine
and to take a picture of a few MITOC members saluting Mt. Washington 'au
natural' (now you'd really better keep an eye out for the pictures on the
web page!!!). After that silliness ended we started down the mountain. By
this time it was getting late and we needed to start moving a little faster
than we had been.

We slugged down the trail, slowing only for a few particularly icy or rocky
sections. We hit the top of the ridge above the Tuckerman Ravine Hut around
3:30 or so. After putting on snow pant we proceeded down to the hut using a
modified glissage / butt tobaggan approach. I was the last one down and the
track that had been formed made for a REALLY quick decent which was LOTS of
fun. It also gave everyone a chance to practice braking and arresting with
the ice axes.

We regrouped at the shelter and headed down to the car. On the way down the
road I broke out the sled (really just a glorified plastic sheet)  I had
hauled up with me and some of us took turns sledding down. The thing went
like stink and proved to be very difficult to control. I couldn't stay on
the thing, Jesse couldn't get it to go straight, Rick couldn't stop, and Jen
simply laughed her way down the mountain. At this point we had managed to
accumulate a large group of hikers who were happy to laugh at all of this
going on.

We arrived back at the cars around 4:30 and packed up. Most of the group
headed off to Boston after a quick stop at IME to pick up some gear and
browse the shelves. 6 of us stayed at Intervale again and had another great
winter school high fat content dinner (at the local pizza parlor). 

All in all it was a fantastic trip. We had no real medical problems, no
equipment problems, everybody was well prepared and had the proper skills,
and the weather was more wonderful than you could every hope for! Again,
keep your eyes peeled on the web site for the pictures which will probably
be up sometime next week.

-------------------------------------
Scott FitzGerald

MIT Outing Club
Board of Directors / Intervale Cabin Manager

(617) 253-2988 (MITOC office)
(617) 441-5307 (home)

sfitzger@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu/activities/mitoc
http://web.mit.edu/sfitzger/www

