Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA01334; Tue, 31 Mar 98 11:07:08 EST
Received: from puck.rosaparks.cambridge.k12.ma.us by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA27004; Tue, 31 Mar 98 11:03:23 EST
X-Sender: clavelle@puck.rosaparks.cambridge.k12.ma.us
Message-Id: <v01510100b146bbfb3994@[192.233.10.152]>
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Date: Tue, 31 Mar 1998 11:59:34 -0400
From: archimedes@alum.mit.edu (Cathy Lavelle)
Subject: trip report

Following is an 9 day old trip report. As you read it, remember - it was
only 9 days ago! Hard to believe as I sit here sweating...

Five of us met at 6:30am at the mitoc office on Saturday March 21 to go
cross country skiing in NH. Although there was no snow on the ground in
Boston, some people had said there was good snow in NH. Also, we were
expecting a winter storm later that day. We took a while getting gear
together in the office, and then we took a while at Carberry's, but we
finnally headed up RT 93. I had a Nat'l Forest map, and had marked several
possible ski destinations. We decided to try to go to the first one on 93 -
exit 28, just north of the Camelot exit. We passed this exit, because there
was more bare ground than snow. We continued on to Lincoln, which also had
lots of bare ground! We decided to go to the northern most site I knew of -
Beaver Brook ski trail. We headed through Franconia notch and onto RT 3.
The place has some nice little trails, but we barely had enough snow to ski
on. It was somewhat slushy at first. I was pleased with the grip of my
waxless skiis on the up hills, but they don't glide very fast on the
downhills. I berated two of the participants for wearing cotton on a day
with a 100% chance of precipitation.

We finnished the loop early, so as we went back through Franconia notch, we
stopped at the base of Cannon cliff to check out the bike trail. Although
snowmobiles had been on it, there was a lot of snow, and so we skiied until
dusk, at which point it started to hail.

We drove back to Plymouth, stopped at the store for dinner and junk food,
and drove to Camelot. Camelot had the most snow of all the places we had
been that day.

We started a fire, cooked a nice dinner, and waited for the hail to change
to snow, which it did at about 9pm. I went to sleep early.

I woke at 7am. Outside, there were 4 inches of fresh snow, and it was still
falling. Quite beautiful. We dozed for annother half hour, but I couldn't
wait to explore the trails around Camelot. I had promised everyone that we
would go to Dunkin Donuts on our way to wherever we would ski, but I wanted
to ski around Camelot for a while first. I went to the car to get my skiis,
and realized that we weren't going anywhere for a while. The cars were
plowed in, and the road already had 2 inches of snow on it since the last
time the plow came through.

I put on my skiis and skiid through the woods, trying to follow the trail
markers on our property. Luckily, the woods don't have too much underbrush,
so I was able to ski around even when I couldn't find the trail. I was
almost lost, and feared I would have to backtrack the whole way that I had
come, when I found the cabin again. Susan decided to hike around, I forced
Matt and Mike to follow me, and Adam stayed inside (Adam and Susan hoped to
leave early).

By now there were 6 inches of fluffy powder. It was more like snowshoeing
than skiing until we has tracks set. It was quite bizzare trying to folllow
the trail blazes. Anyone want to try to map out the trils on our property?
We went in circles a lot, but I thought it wass great fun.

Adam shoveled his car oput and he and Susan tried to leave early, but their
car couldn't make it up a small hill, since the plow hadn't been by in a
while. After discussing the risks of driving down to the main road (and
after trying to push the car up the road), they gave up and parked again,
waiting for a plow.

Matt, Mike and I went for a short ski on the dirt road opposite the cabin.
At first it was hard work breaking trail through 12 INCHES of fresh powder
on a slight up hill, but later on the road joins with a snowmobile trail,
and it was much easier since a snowmobile had packed down the snow.

At around 3pm, it had stopped snowing and we decided to try to get home.
Right before we got into the cars, a plow finally went by, and so it wasn't
too difficult.

My lasting thought is that waking up to fresh snow (still falling) at
Camelot is one of the coolest experiences I've had. Unfortunatly, We won't
get a chance to repeat it for 9 months or so...


