Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA11927; Thu, 2 Apr 98 19:11:33 EST
Received: from PLUME.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA06404; Thu, 2 Apr 98 19:11:53 EST
Date: Thu, 2 Apr 1998 19:11:11 -0500 (EST)
From: Helen Johnson <hjohnson@plume.mit.edu>
X-Sender: hjohnson@plume
Subject: Intervale weekend trip report (20-22 March)
Message-Id: <Pine.GSO.3.95q.980402190554.16015B-100000@plume>
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: TEXT/PLAIN; charset=US-ASCII



Okay, so it's a bit out of date by now, but here's what we got up to the
last weekend of great snow up in the White Mountains.......


To celebrate Matt finishing his thesis, the beginning of Spring Break, and
the fabulous snow expected to fall in New Hampshire last weekend, a group
of 9 or 10 of us headed up to Intervale for a few days of fun in the
snow.  Some of us were luckier than others and managed to get away on
Thursday night to take advantage of a day on the slopes without the usual
weekend crowds.....Matt, Tim and Helen, along with a couple of visiting
Brits who wanted to see what REAL snow was all about, left Boston between
5pm and 10pm on Thursday evening (entirely at the mercy of BA arrivals
into Logan airport!), and after just a few hours sleep at the cabin were
headed for Sunday River.  The snow conditions were perfect (in my humble
opinion!), with several inches of fresh powder which had fallen the night
before, and temperatures just below freezing.  The top of the mountain was
blanketed in cloud, and it wasn't uncommon for us to have the slope to
ourselves on the higher runs.  Everybody had a fantastic day's
skiing....and with no broken ribs this time!
	We made speedy progress back to the cabin (a little too speedy for
the local traffic police!), and after the female members of the group
cooled off with a snow bath on the deck, we settled in while Tim cooked up
a huge pot of Cincinnati chilli......a meal to be remembered!  During the
course of the evening Carolyn, Todd and others showed up, and we discussed
plans for the following day - Todd's solo multi-day hike in the
Presidentials was abandoned due to the avalanche danger (which forced him
to spend Sat night in our company at the cabin too :-) !)
	By Saturday morning the sun was out and the number of people in
the cabin had multiplied overnight.....Carolyn had moved inside from the
yurt due to the chill factor, Bill had arrived and Otto had pitched his
tent on the site of the old cabin - a wise move which gave him an extra
hour's sleep in the morning!  Todd and Areg took off to go
ice-climbing on Cathedral Ledge, and over a leisurely breakfast Bill chose
a hike for the rest of us......the Hancock loop trail, which starts on the
Kancamagus highway and involves a 2-3 mile hike in followed by a 1.5 mile
loop taking in both north and south peaks of Mt. Hancock. After the
obligatory stop at Dunkin' Donuts for Carolyn's coffee and some "Blobs" we
had a fantastic drive along the almost deserted highway, leaving the sun
behind us unfortunately as we headed west, and arrived at the trailhead by
noon.  
	The beginning of the trail was a very pleasant gently-sloping 2
miles, over snow that was at least 3 feet deep (most of the trail blazes
were below knee-height!).  Snowshoes weren't absolutely necessary, but
most of us chose to wear them anyway.  After 2 hours working up a sweat
and an appetite (without finding the beginning of the loop part of the 
trail!) half of the group headed back, whilst 5 of us carried on to see if
we could at least SEE the summit!
	By the time we arrived at the start of the loop the wind had got
up and it had started to snow.  We decided to head in the direction of the
south peak (0.5 miles away)......what the trail sign did NOT tell us was
that the 0.5 mile trail was practically vertical, covered in about a foot
of soft powder, and unbroken!  By the time we made it to the summit,
(which, with a bit of imagination, and if you stand on top of a very large
snow drift, is just about above tree-line!) the weather had beaten us to
it, and there was no view to speak of.  But this didn't dampen our
exhilaration to have made it to the top!  We took the usual summit
photo shots, and then dropped down into the trees again for some lunch
(mainly kipper snacks, dried mango and a sausage chewed at both ends!) 
	Given the time and the approaching bad weather we decided to
abandon the rest of the loop and head back down the way we had come up.
Hiking up might have been hard work because of the steepness, but at least
that meant there was only one way down!  We slithered in 15 mins down to
the trail junction, and then hiked back out to the parking lot, arriving
just before dark.
	Back at the cabin, whilst another huge pot of Cincinnati chilli
simmered on the stove (was this really a good idea?!) we turned into
contortionists stretching out our tired muscles on the rug, and swapped
stories about our day - Todd and Areg had had a great day ice-climbing
but were both suffering from bruised knuckles.  Matt, despite being ill
with a cough and almost unable to speak by this time, still managed to
tease the Brits present....most of which we deserved of course!
	The fresh 6 inches of snow on the deck by Sunday morning proved
too good to miss for Tim and Otto, who headed off for another day's
skiing/snowboarding and decided to stay at Intervale another night.  The
rest of us, constrained by more BA schedules and by that irritation called
work headed for home.....eventually!!....Those travelling with Todd got
more exercise pushing his car through the snow when it got stuck, and
helping to change his shredded tyre when he eventually noticed it!  The
snowplough which sprayed snow all over those crouched on the road side of
Todd's car (as well as burying the wheel nuts!) didn't do much to help!
	We all made it back to Boston in time to spend the evening 
watching movies over pizza and wine - a great end to another fantastic
trip!


Quotes of the weekend
---------------------

Many were used and abused during the course of the weekend: most were
funny in context; ALL were hilarious out of context. Amongst the best
were...

	"It goes through you like a porsche.." 
		(about the chilli....what else?!)
	"Did I say that out loud?!"
	"Don't squash the crisps darling!"
		(our attempt to teach Tim the finer points of the English
		language)
	"STEAMROLLER....!!"
	"I've lost my nuts!"
		(Todd's.....need I say more?!)

and not forgetting that the whole weekend was  
		"..all about love"!














