Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA18008; Tue, 5 May 98 13:30:37 EDT
Received: from MIT.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA16018; Tue, 5 May 98 13:30:17 EDT
Received: from JOULE.MIT.EDU by MIT.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA18151; Tue, 5 May 98 13:30:05 EDT
Message-Id: <2.2.32.19980505173014.006870fc@po9.mit.edu>
X-Sender: cbarrett@po9.mit.edu
X-Mailer: Windows Eudora Pro Version 2.2 (32)
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Date: Tue, 05 May 1998 13:30:14 -0400
From: Christopher Barrett <cbarrett@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Trip Report: West River Rally

        Well this trip is a bit stale by now, but under threat of "publish
or perish" from the Trip Whip, here it is.  Someone should inform her
however, that the job title was intended to be figurative only ...
 
WEST RIVER RALLY

        The West river near Jamaica, VT is flooded for two weekends a year
by controlled release from the Ball Mountain dam, April 25/26 being one of
those times.  The normally quiet (if not dry!) West then rages for two days
and serves as a whitewater Mecca, with hordes of wetsuited paddlers
descending to camp and to run the river in a plastic armada of canoes,
kayaks, and rafts (and even one crazy on an innertube!).

        Nine of us made the trip from MIT, and were joined by ~300 others in
all, from 6 or 7 states.  Matt led the trip, and was accompanied by Scott,
Brian, Kate, Bill, Carolyn, and Chris.  Pat and Millie joined us on Saturday
evening.

        Gathering Saturday at the boathouse at the decidedly un-holy hour of
5:00am (a small yet vocal minority of us who leaned more towards 'the crack
of noon' were outvoted), we loaded up the trucks and set a direct course,
with all haste, to the nearest Dunkin' Donuts.  With our bodies loaded to
the maximum levels of caffeine allowed by the DEA, we proceeded along Rt. 2
west.  Any ideas we might have had about sleeping in the truck were quickly
quenched by Scott's driving style.  While we appreciated his ... enthusiasm
to reach the river, it should be noted for future trips that five kayaks on
one's roof affect the handling characteristics somewhat when trying to
corner on two wheels in a roundabout.  Thus we made another brief stop to
reattach kayaks which had enjoyed a momentary taste of freedom from the roof
racks.

        The base camp/control center for this flotilla weekend is Jamaica
State Park, off of Rt. 30 (well signed), just past the little town of
Jamaica, VT, off of I-91.  The main parking lot there is the takeout for the
Upper West, the put in for the Lower, and also served as an impromptu tent
city for boat, gear, and food vendors too.

        The upper section is class III (with 2 notable class IV hazards) and
was run by only a few of the advanced kayakers there, while the lower
section is a swift class II and proved to be popular with everyone (read:
bumper boats all weekend).

        We put in to run the lower section, after leaving a vehicle at the
takeout (the Rt. 100 bridge, ~3 mi down Rt. 30).  Although wide and fairly
free from obstruction, the current is swift during flood, and the river
provides few accessible eddies, pools, or flat sections to recover or
regroup.  It's mostly long sections of fast-moving chop and rollers,
punctuated with scattered play-holes and surfing waves, so you really need
to be paying attention all the time, or risk being one with the fishes.

        The beginners of the group paddled very well in the strong current,
most notably Kate who showed off by running much of the first section
sideways, and Carolyn who demonstrated that she didn't even need to be in
her boat to navigate the rapids successfully.  Scott often had trouble
making up his mind which side of the rocks to skirt, and compromised by
going right over the tops (the joy of rental boats...).  Some of the holes
and standing waves were of surfable size, so Matt and Brian showed us all
how it is done with an impressive display of aquatic ballet.

        After a shuttle, gorp, and another successful descent of the lower
section, it was late afternoon so we made camp.  Many people camped on-site
at Jamaica S.P., but we went back to Rt. 100 to the Windhall Campground,
which was far less overrun with rafting yahoos.  In contrast to previous
years when pre-season camping was free, they were charging $18 a site,
though Scott snuck us all in with his good looks, smile, and a "Yeah, we're
all with ... ah ... RPI! - That's right ... RPI prepaid.", and led us in
(with our MA plates) to see if there were indeed any RPI people to barge in on.

        There were, and the campsite (though overloaded) was a beautiful
backdrop to the trip.  We pitched our tents on the bank of a tumbling brook,
and took turns tossing a frisbee into the icy water.

        For dinner we drove back into Metropolitan Jamaica, where the church
there hosts an annual all-you-can-eat pasta dinner for the paddlers (trip
note: go EARLY to avoid a long hungry lineup).  Fortunately, the dress code
was soiled polypropylene and helmet-head, so we were properly attired.  The
wide selection of homemade pies was the highlight of the meal, though the
traditional status of 'all-you-can-eat' might be in jeopardy for next year
now, after they witnessed Bill Finger in Action.

        We arrived back at the campground to a roaring fire, and our
no-holds-barred round of full-contact Energyball around the campfire
attracted the curious and frightened the timid.  Opening rounds included ~25
of us around the fire, though despite some solid defensive 'bing'ing from
Scott and a few clutch 'Sch-WAA's from Carolyn, we came up short to RPI when
all the dust had settled.

        The stars were spectacular and the night was calm and clear (though
mostly because it was pretty damn chilly) beside the soothing brook, which
made the camping one of best parts of the trip I thought.

        We rose (at a reasonable hour this time), chiseled the ice from our
boats and clothes on the line, and ran the lower section again.  By this
point our aches were adding up and technique suffering, and hence most of us
had ample opportunity to practise our rolls, including one hapless paddler
(who shall remain nameless) who had the misfortunate opportunity to work on
his high-panic handroll after losing his paddle upside down!

        Matt's back was sore so he decided not to join our planned
upper-section finale, but accompanied us while we scouted the angry surge
from the cliff above.  After witnessing a dangerous river rescue from one of
the two serious hazards (trip note: BIG strainer river-rt NOT easily seen
from scout) which left an empty boat pinned vertically and irretrievably
under rock ledge hazard two, we decided not to ... ah ... let Matt get
lonely on the shore all by himself, and declined.  Of course we were
disappointed to miss out, but hey, that's what friends are for.

        Millie, Pat, and Brian were full of energy and stayed for the second
Sunday set of 'rock and roll' on the Lower, while the rest of us piled our
wet and achy limbs into the retreat vehicle.

        BIG cheers for the first-timers Kate and Pat, who paddled splendidly
and fearlessly in the face of big water.

        BIG cheers as well to Matt for spotless leadership of a big motley
group, and to Scott for unfaltering logistical and technical support from
the Bottomless Bronco.

Excellent fun all 'round- Sch-WAA!, sch-WING!!, and a soggy group hug. -cb.

