From: "Stephen P. Linder" <spl@meceng.coe.neu.edu>
Date: Sun, 26 Feb 1995 21:49:11 -0500
Subject: snowy weekend

Trip Report

Andy, Dave, Cathy, Rick, Jim , Ian and I, seven hearty souls, went in
search of Avalon this past Saturday morning. Described as a mystical
place of snow and ice we were told we could find it, not far from Mt.
Willard, at the top of Crawford Notch. Starting up Mt. Willard trail,
after looking both ways at the train station before crossing the
tracks, we hiked up the Mt. Willard trail.  After a short while,
following instructions from our resident mystic we headed in the
woods. After a two hour baptism of snow we wallowed back to the trail
a few hundred yards up hill from where we left it.

Taking this as a sign that we were not good enough to find the holy
grail of ice we went back down to the cars. Four went on to climb four
pitches of very thin ice on the South Facing Cinema gully while the
remaining three exhausted by efforts that morning drove to Cathedral
Ledges and climbed on the practice slabs.

Day Two
After a cold night Rick, Cathy and I went back country skiing along
the Zealand Road North of Crawford Notch. We had an excellent time
skiing along a moderately difficult ski trail up to the summer trail
head to Zealand Falls.  This ski trail unlike many others in the white
mountains was not marred by snow shoe or boot tracks.  (This is
possibly because the snow shoers opt for the flatter road. ) The trail
is well maintained, has wide bridges across most brooks, and even with
only 18 inch of snow cover the trail was wide enough that we were able
to snow plow down the hills.

Snow Conditions
It seems Friday's storm only really brought significant snow to New
Hampshire north of Crawford and Franconia Notch.

Ski Trail Description 
Parking for Zealand in winter is east of Zealand Road on the north
side of Route 302. Start by crossing 302 and skiing along the
snowmobile trail west. Go up Zealand Road several hundred and on the
right (west) you will find the start of the ski trail. Hopefully all
the snowmobiles have staid on there trail on the east side of the road
while the hikers have used the road.  The trail goes up hill for a
mile or so before reaching a campground. Bear right skiing around the
campground loop. Take the second trail that goes right into the
woods. After a short distance on this flat section of trail we hit the
road and snowmobiles again. Head straight/right/uphill, crossing the
Zealand River. The road then goes right, snowmobiles straight and the
ski trail lies in between. This section of trail is several miles
long. It leaves the road and snowmobiles far behind. In places it is
tight but heading up hill it posses only a few quick downhills.

The next option for cutting back to the road is a hiking trail you
pass at right angles to the ski trail after two or so miles. After the
hiking trail the trail climbs at a consistent grade (still almost all
diagonal striding) until it meets the road for the last time several
hundred yards from the summer trail head.

Enjoy,
Stephen
