From: Meg Muckenhoupt <meg@psyche.mit.edu>
Subject: Trip Report: Adirondacks (flat)
Date: Tue, 3 Aug 99 15:53:57 EDT

Trip Report: Adirondacks for the Mild-Mannered
8/3/99

FLORA: High quality edible
FAUNA: Large and carnivorous
GEOGRAPHY: Quite flat and wet
OVERALL: B+

Having finally examined a map of the state of  New York, Scott and I
decided that driving from Ithaca to the High Peaks, hiking, and driving
back to Boston in four days was bit too ambitious for the likes of us. 
Instead, we bought the Adirondack Mountain Club's West Central Guide,
and set forth for the flatlands.  We first arrived at Cathedral Pines, an
extraordinarily unambitious 100 yard walk through simply enormous pine
trees.  Our experience was much enhanced by finding ripe blackberries on
the roadside next to the trail.

Only a small portion of the Adirondack State Park has what you might call
mountains; most of the "park" consists of lakes, vacation homes, and
timber lots.  In fact, a great deal of the land inside the "park" is privately
owned.  Thus, we were able to sample the multiple delights of The Donut
Shop, serving fresh fried doughballs for 31 years from the midst of the
place (Eagle Bay, one of many "park" towns).  The Donut Shop is, as
Yankee Magazine put it, "The best doughnut shop in the central
Adirondacks."  However, the place seems to be utilizing recipes from an
era predating powdered sugar, making their cinnamon-sugar donuts an
oddly gritty experience.  We asked Mr. Donut if there were any likely
campsites nearby; he directed us to Limekiln Lake, a local drive-in state
camp site.

The kindly staff at Limekiln Lake mentioned that the place had a "bear
problem."  For those of us who have read the MITOC copy of 
_Bear_Attacks_, the term "bear problem" evokes images of great bloated
beasts leaping onto tents whose inhabitants made the fatal mistake of 
eating within a week of their trip, flattening the campers within and
devouring everything but their skulls (which are too large to fit inside a
bear's jaws - doesn't everyone know that?).  The Limekiln Lake bear
problem is a little different.  At 8:30 pm, Scott and I heard something like
an asthmatic swine outside our tent.  Scott peered out and saw a black bear
nosing at the bear-proof container the staff had thoughtfully provided.  He
yelled, and the bear left.  The problem occurred when the bear visited each
and every one of the 219 other campsites at the park, whose inhabitants
yelled "Git out, bear!", banged pots together, and made other unpleasant
noises for the rest of the night.   That was a problem.   

Public Service Announcement:  If you *do* go backpacking in the
Adirondacks, you should learn how to hang up your food properly and
bear-proof your camp.

Drowsy and perturbed, we chose an easy hike the next morning.  We
walked 4.5 miles from  Big Moose Road to the Queer Lake lean-to.  For
some reason, I expected us to gain at least 1,000 feet of elevation, and was
surprised when the hike took less than two hours.  Frankly, I'm just not
used to walking in flat places any more.  The entire walk led through mixed
hardwood/conifer forest, most of it grown since last century's logging. 
Occasionally, though, we saw huge pines that were somehow left standing
all these years; more often we saw 4-foot diameter stumps.  The idea of
walking in a forest consisting of old-growth trees became more real, and
mind-boggling.     

We stayed the night at the lean-to on a huge lake filled with blue-green
water and loons.  The only human construction we could see was the lean-
to; we were surrounded by forest, sky, and water.   The lake was just
slightly cool and clear.  We swam across the the short way; it took us 12
minutes to reach the other side.  There were raspberries and blueberries
around the lean-to, though the fruit was a bit dry and tasteless (probably
due to the drought).  Various day-trippers stopped by in the afternoon, and
tourist floatplanes buzzed overhead, but after sunset the place was silent. 
Or, rather, it was silent until 8:30, when the mosquitoes decided to sample
our tasty ears.  We set up the tent.     

The next morning, we set out for West Mountain, on the West Mountain
trail.  Early on, we passed an enormous marshy meadow, or "vlei" for you
Scrabble enthusiasts, complete with odd wildflowers and an elusive hawk.  
Judging by the mud I saw, I suspect that between April and July most of
the trails in this region are swamps, though we found them reasonably dry. 
Ah, the perils of flatland hiking.  
  
As a fan of "The Blair Witch Project," I was alert for deathly omens in the
woods.   We saw several: as we walked, our heads were constantly
surrounded by large buzzing flies, which only had a passing interest in
biting us (WHAT DO THEY WANT?); we saw plenty of Indian Pipes,
sickly white plants that thrive on dead matter, and mysterious dead trees in
ponds (HOW DID THEY GET THERE?):  and, most uncanny, we did not
see a single person after our first half-hour of walking.   Scott and I were
alone the entire day.  We took advantage of this fact by bathing au naturel
in Chub Lake, an even more idyllic, pristine pond than Queer Lake.  Chub
Lake was also blessed with dozens of bright blue dragonflies hovering and
mating in the sun over clear water. That day, we walked as far as Pigeon
Lake, and came back without bothering to get to West "Mountain" (it's
800 feet), for a total of about 10 miles.  The flies abandoned us when we
got back to Queer Lake.

When we returned to the lean-to, we found it occupied by a troop of 10-
year-old boys from the Gorham, NY YMCA, and two teenage leaders who
were "wondering" if we were going to spend the night.  After telling a few
bear stories (what else would a camping 10-year-old need?), Scott and I
decamped to the other end of the peninsula, where we could watch the
sunset- and five very silly red merganser ducks -in peace.  We could also
skinny-dip without corrupting young minds (unless you count the fuzzy
brown baby loon).  At about seven, we started to hear odd creaking
sounds, halfway between a squeaky door and a bleat.  We crept carefully
around the campsite, hoping to startle some errant frog, or personable
toad, but could not find the source of the noise.  Eventually, we concluded
that the sound was coming from *inside* an enormous log.  In the great
forests of the Adirondacks, the termites are a powerful, mighty force.  The
mosquitoes are also great and terrible, as Scott discovered when he spent a
little too long hanging up our food after sunset (to elude bears and
chipmunks).

After counting our mosquito bites and toe-blisters the next day, we decided
to hike back to the road, instead of venturing down to Cascade Lake to
swim and see the falls.  We paused at a pond to watch a kingfisher dive,
and admire the water lilies.  When we returned, the little red car was just as
we left it, and The Donut Shop had just finished cooking up a fresh batch.  

                  
meg


