Date: Tue, 21 Sep 1999 11:39:54 -0400 (EDT)
From: Hector Briceno <hbriceno@graphics.lcs.mit.edu>
To: aumond@MIT.EDU, bradiko@MIT.EDU, cguth@wellesley.edu, doml@MIT.EDU,
        kerim@MIT.EDU, eklund@ll.mit.edu, histed@MIT.EDU,
        jussi.ala-kihnia@datex-ohmeda.com, stf@alum.mit.edu,
        elron@alum.mit.edu, stoph@MIT.EDU, zan@MIT.EDU, meaftias@MIT.EDU,
        amsab@MIT.EDU, amahone@wellesley.edu, adomin@MIT.EDU, ingram@MIT.EDU,
        bwalker@MIT.EDU, blockyer@MIT.EDU, yorkc@MIT.EDU, oliveira@MIT.EDU,
        knutsand@MIT.EDU, lorien@MIT.EDU, mjevans@MIT.EDU, mholling@MIT.EDU,
        lehman@MIT.EDU, mrwarden@MIT.EDU, minw@MIT.EDU, mlpriebe@MIT.EDU,
        nthaper@MIT.EDU, olivera@MIT.EDU, mcnamara@math.mit.edu,
        rzeitham@MIT.EDU, remlein@wellesley.edu, ronny@MIT.EDU, sdhond@MIT.EDU,
        songgao@MIT.EDU, sdey@MIT.EDU, cveckova1@yahoo.com, winyang@MIT.EDU,
        hbriceno@MIT.EDU, holt@MIT.EDU, sgottesman@wellesley.edu,
        mfreed@MIT.EDU, awang@wellesley.edu, dkeen@MIT.EDU,
        dga@wind.lcs.mit.edu, bluejay@MIT.EDU, mlim@MIT.EDU, nltan@MIT.EDU,
        toocool@MIT.EDU, rleary@wellesley.edu, rdror@MIT.EDU, tarjei@MIT.EDU,
        whf@creare.com
Subject: Intro Circus '99 Trip Report

Howdy All,

First for those of you who just joined the MITOC community, welcome.
There is a tradition of writing colorful and kodak-capturing trip
reports after big trips.  There are usually even a couple, since for
example I was not on all trips.  I am writing this one, as a seed for
other people to write how they saw this trip, and to be honest just
because I heard what I called the QOT or Quote of the Trip (but you
will have to read until the end to read).


So it all started at the police semi-circle early Friday.  I was the
first to arrive (some of you later saw that I was anxious about this
trip).  Robert arrived few moments later, and we decided to use one of
the large buckets with wheels (I am a foreigner for those of you who
did not notice, so I dont know the word for these things) to haul
about 132 cubic feet of gear, from the office to the parking lot.  It
was Robert's first time in the Service elevator.

Ok so people started trickling in, at this point I got jumpy.  some
people might recall the guy jumping around and hence the adjective
jumpy.  Let's move on, so we all got on our way without any
incidents.  I really thought some people were going to get lost since
it was their first time going to the cabin, but no one did.

We got the the cabin around 10pm, there were already a bunch of people
there.  The ground was a little damp so I opted to sleep inside at the
compromise of late quiet hours (although rumor has it that it was ME
who was responsible for the late night conversations in the
loft...rumors..).  Oh for the people not familiar with our Camelot
Cabin, it has 3 rooms: A large kitchen/dinning room, A large
Family/Planning room, and above that room, a loft that sleeps about 25-30
or so (people also sleep in the family room).

In the spirit of meeting people and having people make fool of
themselves, a group of people played sherades(tm).  Although it seemed
that one of the teams had psychic powers that made some difficult
movie titles easier for the time (I am contacting Mr Randy about this
paranormal activity).  Then our courageous (courageous for organizing
this trip, I really think it was going to be real chaos, but he did a
superb job of keeping the entropy index to a single digit) leader
Robert called order to announce Saturday's activity.  There were trips
to the classic franconia ridge with Tarjei, canoing with Bill Finger,
More hiking with Christy 32-miles-in-a-day Guth; And I, in conjuntion
with Brad, Dominque, Dave, Pat and other experienced climbers lead a
beginners trip to Rumney.  I can only speak from my trip, initially I
was pessimistic about it since the rock would be damp in the morning,
but after a quick reconnoissance of the cliff in the morning before
people woke up (with the side benefit of freshly brewed DD coffee) it
seemed that it would be ok.

So we set out in the morning with a group of like 16 people (like
california talk).  We split into two groups: my group went to the
parking lot wall, and Brad's group went to the 5.8 Crag.  We spent
time walking around, and noticing that many other groups were doing
classes there, but finally arrived at a wall, and were able to setup
some climbs for beginners.  The morning went without a glitch,
everyone learned how to belay (safeguard the climber while he or she
is going up or down), and everyone got to climb; except for the fact
that the first climbs were not really the best beginners climb, but
everyone had fun (which is why we do what we do).  In the evening, a
group that went hiking in the morning joined us to get some climbing.
At this point we had a nice long climb set up that starts easy and
progressively gets harder.  All the evening crowd got a chance to do
this one.  I was very pleased to see that this was the very first time
that some people climbed and that they had a good first time (I can be
disastrous for people future climbing careers having a bad first
experience on the cliffs).  My time and effort were rewarded by the
happiness and satisfaction of the people.

So the sun was setting and my guns were almost unloaded (guns in
climbers-parlance is the amount of strengh or freshness of forearm and
hand strength), so it was time to head back to the cabin.  Our secret
plan was to arrive as the dinner was ready, but we overshoot by 20 or
so minutes.  We got back and the cabin was filled with joy and a
festive air, that made one say "dam, is good to be here".  There was a
camp fire going, the table was filled with food, like in the roman
courts.  Later in the night, our friend Brad 'you-will-square-dance'
Backus lively called and organize a square dance.  He was able to the
3 squares!! very impressive.  After the square dance, Brad and his
covert partner Janet 'Jackson' demonstrated some of the highlight
moves of the 80s, like the moonwalk, the worm, and other moves (they
obviously rehearsed and practised this before hand, although they
would probably deny this).

Around 11pm, Sunday's activities were announce, although some people
were heading back, the majority stayed for even more fun/action
packed activities.  There were more hikes and climbing trips.
Dominique took leadership and organized another trip to rumney since
still a lot of people wanted to learn climbing.  I had personal plans
for sunday, I wanted to do a long climb (4-6 hours) at Cannon the next
day. 

The night was capped with a 15 minute walk to the fire tower.  At this
point my energy gauge was at 'E', and I decided to forgo the
opportunity, but it seemed like half or more of the group went up
there to see the stars.

I woke up for an alpine start before everyone, and by 6:30am I was on
I93 with a Bagel and Coffee in my stomach.  After driving a while, the
tiredness from the previous long day and short night hit in, and since
my guns were not fully loaded, we decided to call off the climb and
just head back, and maybe climb at rumney.  For people who don't know
me, I am know as Hector 'Safety' Briceno, and since I did right for a
committing climb I headed back without any qualms.

We got back to Rumney (the climbing area) at 7:30 or so, there were
probably 6 souls around besides us.  We decided to take a nap since it
was still cool outside, and sleep was needed. A nap became a siesta, a
siesta became a largitus siesta.  We got up at 10:30am to notice that
the place was packed to the rim with people.  I was overwhelmed with
how many people were there.  Climbing seemed dubious, we decided "why
don't we head back and tell Dominique that the place is packed".  As
we are driving out we are impressed to see 'another' class was
arriving with 20+ people, 'now the place is really packed'.  A closer
inspection revealed that it was our group!!!.  We stopped, and by
looking at the exciting faces of the people who wanted to climb, the
class or trip was on, we parked and joined the group.  

The group was split into two groups, I was going to lead one group and
Dominique the other.  Noticing that my group had a majority of guys, I
made up some story about car groups and that we should reshuffle, and
was able to come out better: 4 boys 6 girls.  Dominique was not very
amused :-).  Anyways, we parted for an area that no one had been
before, but that promised to have some beginner climbs.  After 10
minutes of walking on the street, we bumped into Scott 'Gear-Boy'
Fitzgerald who was looking for a placed to park his mammoth truck with
a trailer full of canoes in a place that did not have space even for a
Yugo.  We let him know of our destination, and he proceeded for his
search of parking space.  We made it to the trail head and started for
the ascent.  The trail was obvious at first until we got the the
Boulder field.  It was well know that people have gotten lost here,
and never found, but it seemed that no one except me was aware of this
fact, so I decided to keep quiet.  A 5 minute walk brought us back to
where we were.  Another attempt shot us into a direction that would
not bring us back, but did not show signs of progress.  It was
implicitly decided by the group leaders that we would take the young
lads and lasses up a class 3 scramble path to the cliffs (if we got
lucky and found them).  Impressively, Scott caught up to us, after he
parked his truck in the town hall, and biked up the paved road.  Now
the larger group proceeded up the mountain.  I think at this time some
people got a taste of mountaneering and exposure, since in my personal
opinion, if some of them fell on some places, they would have really
gotten hurt; but then maybe not, because if Hector 'safety' Briceno
was taking them up that way, that would be unlikely.

Eureka, we heard some voices and we hit a bulls-eye to our
destination.  Of course, I was not suprised, since I knew all along
that we would find the place no problem.  Alessandra 'future-to-be
more involved with the club than she think she is' Sabelli and I setup
a nice beginner climb, although I thought that since it required a
little strength that it might proved problematic.  To the contrary,
Alessandra helped tremendously with the class, proudly showing and
demonstrating that girls can have better technique than men, and can
overcome obstacles with thought and not strength.  Slowly one by one,
she coached and orchestrated everyone on the climb, I thank her for
helping.  Other two climbs were set up and people had a shot at them. 

Unfortunately, at around 4 o'clock, our friend Dominique found us and
informed us of some bad news: "Tow trucks are having a party, and are
taking a bunch of cars...Hector's yours is gone.."  The police was not
pleased that so many cars were parked at Rumney and some too close to
the road.  At this point, Stephanie (one of the drivers) and myself
embarked in a crusade to recover our cars.  The rest of the group
stayed behind for 45 more minutes or so.  With the help of Dominique
and Scott we recovered the cars.  I went to the Parking lot wall, were
Dominique had taken his group and was pleased by the fact that they
found a good spot and that people had a good time.  I squeezed in one
more climb before all the group was back together.

After we gathered in the parking lot, some of the people who had to be
back left.  I proposed to wrap up the trip with a traditional dinner
at UNOs in Concord.  We did our good samaritan deed by helping some
MIT Alums whose car had been towed to recover it.

We all made it to UNOs, a group of 12.  Most of the people were
pleased by their meals, except for one Janet 'I-like-THICK-crust' who
complained that her crust was not thick enough.  We had a interesting
and enlightening table conversation, touching upon Ethics,
Internationality, size of America (a comment for one patriotic
american said, that all of your countries can fit in texas), Biology,
Meal preferences, Beer, Alcohol content of pi~a coladas, even some
manly competition to impress the ladies at the table.  We won't
mention any names.  Did I thank Dominique for helping out?.

Finally the apex of the night was reached by what I think is the QOT,
when as we are talking we overheard one girl in our table saying  
"Can I ride your Spider"!!!! (I recommended the listener to say 'yes').
Again we won't mention any names.  Robert I would like to thank you
again for organizing such a great trip, and in the words of Pat
'I-am-tough' Brown: "This circus is the circus with the most circus
atmosphere that I have ever been to" and I concur.  

Hector Briceno

