Date: Thu, 14 Oct 1999 19:41:50 -0400
From: Robert Zeithammer <rzeitham@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Trip report: The Battle of Baker River

Trip report: The Battle of Baker River
Participants: Chrissy, Kristen, Jean, Svetlana, Marie, Marek, Bob,
Krzysztof, Winston, Marco, Matt H., Robert Z.

Fall Circus Sunday started out as a beautiful sunny day, so most circus
participants decided to head for the Rumney rocks. But many of the people
from my Saturday Osceola hike opted for an even easier day floating down
Baker River (do I need to go into reasons why they felt tired after
Saturday?). Little did they know about what lay ahead...

Having never even seen the Baker and hearing about the Saturday crew
completing the trip in six hours, I promised easy 3-4 hours of sun-bathing
and relaxation. When we got to the drop-off point, it was clear that we
wouldn't see any of the promised sunshine for the rest of the day. And when
we started paddling, it became clear that there was still plenty of energy
left and relaxation would have to be deferred!

Quickly, impromptu races started (I wonder who would initiate them? :-).
Not surprisingly, it was the canoe manned by Chrissy 'used to carrying
large boulders' and myself 'rated at 0.9 Chrissy' that always started and
then often became victorious in these one-on-one fights. But the
competition was stiff. Marco 'grabs and pushes without mercy' and Jean 'I
smile while I steer your boat into the bankside' mounted several successful
attacks. Matt and Kristen 'we are not even racing' paddled feverishly and
often escaped for a while before our endurance and determination caught up
with them. Needless to say, neutral ships of Bob & Svetlana and Kryzstof &
Winston, as well as the vastly-superior ship of Marek & Marie (they
actually know how to paddle!!) , were not attacked. But shortly before
lunch, Krzysztof & Winston capsized in a rapid after a close-up encounter
with a fallen tree, and the cold apparently put warrior blood in their veins. 

So after  the lunch, realizing that the rain was not going to stop anytime
soon even if we had waited longer protected by trees, we took off to the
next and better round of racing and battles. Soon, the super-ship named
"Bully of the Baker" formed spontaneously by getting three boats tied
together. Under the moral and spiritual leadership of Kristen who put her
paddle away and sat in the center front and guided by the skillful arms of
Matt at the rudder, Chrissy, myself, and the two people who had nothing to
lose (K&W) paddled ahead of everyone. Surprisingly, the craft was quite
controllable and fast. But the superiority of our mega-ship did not stop
Marco 'I never learn' and Jean 'still smiling by now' from attacking us
over and over. But to our mighty vessel, they were a mere anoying insect
buzzing around, unable to sting. Needless to say, we couldn't be capsized
but they surely could, and that's what ended up happening. Rumor has it
that it happened after a powerful push from us, but our press-department
denies any such allegations. By now, we have been on the water for about 4
hours, the drizzle turned into rain, and our minds were focused only on
getting to the end. With all enemy ships sunk, we remained in peaceful
alliance with the other members of the "Group of three" and swiftly paddled
to the end. All things considered, we got through the five hours of rainy
paddling quite smoothly, preoccupied by fun and games. My ending statements
about being dry and warm (including feet!) were not appreciated by most
members of the party, but I felt they were necessary for demonstrating the
skill of the leader..  :-) 

As for the scenery, I was really impressed with the Baker. The fall colors
glowed softly through a white mist that hung above the water, several
straight stretches offered views of distant wooded hills, and there were
only very few houses visible from the water. We even saw two snapper
turtles, so the water must be clean and wildlife abundant. The waters were
calm with only two or three difficult spots along the way. I definitely
recommend this trip to all paddlers in search of an easy half-day run near
Camelot!

Robert 

