Date: Wed, 20 Oct 1999 00:06:31 -0400
From: Andre Girerd <agirerd@draper.com>
Subject: Debilitation Trek
Cc: rjagnow@MIT.EDU, agirerd@draper.com

Trip Report: Pemigewasset Debilitation Trek 
(Fourteen 4000 foot peaks in a day)
Robert Jagnow, Andre' R. Girerd
October 16, 1999

     If madness were an elixir, then some woodsprites must have slipped a
few drops into our cocktails, creating a mixture digestible only by
dilution with a healthy measure of safety and prudence.  Such a concoction
we quaffed this weekend, with the desired effect of lasting bliss and
migrant soreness.
     Rob 'Nocturnal hiking expert' Jagnow and I became quite intoxicated by
the inspirational example of a trio of mountain llamas not too long ago,
and resolved to eradicate the induced itch in our loins by a healthy
prescription of alpine meandering.  Convinced of our cause by a local
weather forecast for clear skies and mild temperatures, we set off to the
fabled Pemigewasset wilderness for a day of mountain conquests.
     For hikes of a certain length, teamwork becomes extraordinarily
important, and in my opinion, we each brought vital skills for the
undertaking.  Apart from general fitness (I can attest to Rob's fitness
level because I row with him for Sloan Crew), we each furnished some
individual abilities.  My dual contributions were knowledge of wilderness
survival and a keen nose.  It turned out that neither of my skills were
actually 'vital' for our journey (although they might have been if
conditions had been different).  We never had to make a shelter, and my two
feats of nasal acuity were rather irrelevant, to say the least.  First, I
detected the faint scent of perfume on an animal I subsequently identify as
human, and second, I correctly ascertain the condition of some fallen
leaves as 'rotting', which was already totally obvious.  Rob Jagnow, on the
other hand, brought two important skills that we actually used.
Unfortunately, they counterbalanced each other.  His night hiking expertise
raised our confidence level for the dark portions of the trek, while his
bionic-man-caliber ears increased the level of nocturnal paranoia by
alerting us to every conceivable wildlife threat.  It is entirely true that
Rob's incredible auditory ability was completely accurate in detecting
every possible target.  It is important to note, however, that half his
targets were real, and the other half were imaginary, like the phantom
'Third Hiker', but the explanation to that encounter must come later.
     After arriving at the Lincoln Woods parking lot from Boston at 10 PM
Friday night, we decided to maximize our sleep time by dozing in my
'surprisingly comfortable' car.  Then, at the unwholesome hour of 1:55 AM,
we awoke to begin our adventure.  (Wholesome hours don't start until 5 AM,
and for me usually 8 AM)  After a simple breakfast and equipment check, we
began our hiking exertions at 2:50 AM.  Before leaving, though, we spent
quite a bit of care taking extra precautions to include important equipment
items like cold weather clothing, iodine tablets for limitless water
supply, redundant flashlights, emergency food, first aid supplies, and
survival aids such as whistle, rope, and spaceblankets.
     We took the ultra-smooth Lincoln Woods trail until it met the more
rugged Osseo trail, which led us up to Mount Flume before 5:30 AM.  Along
the way up Mount Flume, Rob noticed a wee patch of snow.  How neat, I
thought, remembering the clerk at Eastern Mountain Sports who mentioned
that there had been a 'slight dusting' of snow in the Whites on Thursday.
I remember asking the clerk when buying my iodine tablets:'Do you think it
was enough to stick?'  He replied: 'Nah.'  Well, evidently the clerk hiked
in a different region, or possessed an alternative definition of 'stick',
for before even reaching Mt. Flume, we were trudging through some serious
accumulations of snowage.  After Mt. Liberty, I figured that two to three
more inches of snow would have been fit for snowshoes.  This layer of snow
had the unfortunate effect of impeding fast footwork, as many hidden rocks
and slippery ice-covered obstacles conspired to remind us of our humanity.
(Thankfully, we wore full caliber hiking boots.)  Regardless of the
footpath treachery, we appreciated the pristine snow-dusted evergreens for
their aesthetic morale-raising effect.  Rob seemed to delight in finding
animal tracks in the snow as if to attempt to justify that the sounds he
heard were not entirely fictional.  At one point he shouted: 'Grouse!',
after which there appeared a grouse.  Feeling hungry, I muttered something
like 'Breakfast!', but the grouse, not understanding English, just waddled
away nonchalantly, perhaps correctly figuring that we didn't have the time
to build a fire to cook him.
     The sunrise came slightly before we reached the Little Haystack
Mountain, but its onset witnessed from the Franconia Ridge trail was
inspiring to behold.  At this point we gained a vista of the entire
Pemigewasset Wilderness, as well as an appreciation of how much more hiking
was required.  On Mount Lincoln at 7:45 AM we ate breakfast, which
energized us for Mt. Lafayette and the Garfield Ridge trail, which was
perhaps the most treacherous of ice-paths, resulting in an average of 2
minor and 1 major slips per minute.  During the long descent from Lafayette
(at 5260' the highest mountain in the region) and the long ascent up Mt.
Garfield, we witnessed the phenomenon of microclimates, which were small
patches of warm or chill air, at least 15 F degrees different from the
surrounding ambient air temperature.  After leaving Mt. Garfield a bit
before 11 AM (which afforded an excellent view, as well as a reinforced
battle-fortress on its peak) we ran into our first human contact of the
day, who we left blissfully ignorant of our starting point (14 miles back)
for fear of eclipsing his sense of manhood.
     We finally reached the Galehead hut after a semi-interminable hike
from Mt. Garfield, surviving the rigors of snow slippage, unfriendly rock
traps, and some 'tease me more' fake summits.  At this point we're low on
energy and decide to nutritionalize ourselves.  After lunch, leaving our
packs at the hut, we cranked out the 0.5 miles to Galehead Mountain at a
pretty good clip, and amused ourselves on the way down by its lackluster
summit view.  Once back at the hut, we notice a big '48' candle stuck in a
beautifully preserved cake that some backpackers had imported flawlessly.
Evidently, the lady of the group had just finished hiking all 48 four
thousand foot peaks in the New England area and was having a little back
country celebration.  They managed to wriggle out our plan for the day (at
this point 7 out of 14 peaks climbed, 18.1 out of 38.7 miles hiked), and
then, (potentially regarding themselves as mentors to impressionable
hike-fanatics) decided to share their cake with us.  Now at first Rob
declined, saying something about mommies and stranger's food, but I asked
the question on all our minds: 'Is this cake laced with anything I should
know about?'  The woman replied: 'If it is, then we're eating it too.'  Now
this response did not explicitly answer my question in its entirety, but I
eventually decided to be generous and lighten the load on their packs by
taking a piece.  I shared my piece with Rob, and suffice it to say that we
flew up the short but unrelentingly steep Twinway trail to the South Twin
Mountain with nary a breather.
     At the top of the South Twin Mountain, we met two horizontal stiffs
that I initially thought were suffering from exposure, but were actually
just taking a nap.  Then we met some French-speaking Canadians, who,
inhabiting the other end of the energetic spectrum, took off soon after
meeting us in a furious pace toward the North Twin Mountain, our next
destination.  At this point, I believe our competitive spirit was stoked,
for how could we allow pack-carrying, ski-pole-using bilingualists to beat
us to the next peak 1.3 miles away when we had decided to stash our packs
behind a rock for the short dash to North Twin and back?  So we overtook
them, of course.  I even think I said 'Merci' to one of them when he let me
pass.
     We then followed the relatively benign Twinway trail to Mt. Guyot,
where we temporarily ditched some equipment for the loop to Zealand
Mountain and back.  By the time we reached Guyot, the snow cover
disappeared, due to the dual factors of less total precipitation than the
previous region, and the day-long melting effect of the sun.  Of course the
snow transformed itself into mud, but the mud, while messy, didn't slow us
down as much as the snow.  Now either the map we used is inaccurate, or
fatigue began to set in, because the hike from Guyot to Zealand and back
was heinous in steepitude way out of proportion to the benign-looking
contour intervals on the map.  When we actually reached Zealand Mountain at
6:58 PM (24.8 miles), it was like entering a tentsite clearing in the
middle of the woods, duplicating Galehead Mountain for most pathetic summit
view.  We found a sign that said 'Zealand', with the conspicuous absence of
the word 'Mountain', as if the sign-posters were ashamed to give it that
title.  By now the sun was totally gone, so we relied upon our flashlights
for the rest of the trek.
     We then returned to Mt. Guyot, re-energized with foodstuffs, and set
off on the search for West Bond.  (I couldn't resist singing the tune to
'Goldfinger' along the way)  Gladly, the moon provided us some
illumination.  We found West Bond, then bagged Mt. Bond, and then set off
on the quest for our last peak, Bondcliff.  At this point, the search for
the last peak began to resemble a Quixotic adventure, for in the dark, the
highest point of Bondcliff is not altogether obvious from other candidate
highest points.  We reached about 5 mini-peaks each with suitably sized
cairns massive enough to denote the peak, around which Rob and I scrambled
for the highest rock to be able to claim absolute victory.  Then we would
hike a little more and experience the distress of having our flashlights
reveal an even taller rock outcropping, for which a scrambe for the highest
rock would ensue, etc.  This nocturnal adrenaline-charade finally ended
with the real Bondcliff at 11:05 PM, after which we knew the rest of the
journey was downhill.
     Far from being uneventful, the long trek (9.1 miles) back to the car
via the Bondcliff, Wilderness, and Lincoln Woods Trails held the monopoly
on mental debilitation and departures from sanity.  (Ancient shamans might
have had to fast for days in the desert to reach this state, but we
attained it in a day)  I truly began to think that the interminable
downhill slope would never end, that I had obviously dropped the more than
4265' to sea level, and was entering a purgatory of endless repetitions of
seamless downhill segments much like Sisyphus of Greek mythology, who would
roll a huge stone almost to the top of a mountain just to have it slip away
for him to repeat the cycle forever.  The forest began to exhibit a strange
recurrence of features, with logs resembling signposts and leaves
resembling signposts and darkness resembling the possibility of signposts.
This is the point where Rob later admitted to hearing the 'Third Hiker'.  I
think I mumbled some weird incoherent nonsense during this stretch, which
would baffle even the most accomplished Freudian analyst.  Even in our
reduced mental state, we both realized that is was psychologically less
taxing to follow the other person instead of being the 'lead' hiker, for
the follower could aspire to drift into a sleep-while-walk mode while the
leader had to be on the continual lookout for the phantom signposts.
Eventually, we settled into a side-by-side arrangement, but whether this
was due to both of us wanting to follow or both of us stepping up to our
team responsibilities is a secret left behind forever in the woods.
     Then, like a miracle, we reached the car at 4:25 AM and fell asleep
immediately.  I don't remember a single dream in the car that morning, but
I do know that in the future, my dreams (and those of Rob) will be infected
by the snowy 38.7 miles, 14 peaks, 9950 foot elevation gain, 25.5 hour
adventure we completed.
     Fifteen peaks anyone?

Andre' R. Girerd

(Credit due Rob Jagnow for recording times and mileages)

