From: "Tom McIntire" <tomm@geophysical.com>
Subject: Moose River Festival Trip Report
Date: Thu, 21 Oct 1999 14:41:32 -0400

The following (below) was a trip I went on recently. It was not a MITOC
sponsored trip (or sponsored by any other organization for that matter).

For those who do not know, the Moose River Festival is one of ten major
festivals and paddling events that are sponsored by American Whitewater each
year. The Moose is the last festival of the season, and always a lot of
fun...

At any rate, hope you enjoy the tale. It is definitely on the lighter side
of paddling, as opposed to my post a few days ago...

-Tom
Tom McIntire
tomm@grolen.com
http://eol.grolen.com/tomm/index.htm
May All Your Water Be White!!!

In Late September I started trying to round up the usual suspects for a trip
to the Moose Festival in Old Forge, NY. Initially everyone said "Of course I
am going!!!" Later I discovered that Butch wanted to take Danielle (his
daughter) paddling that weekend, so they were probably going to stay home
and go either to the West or the Pemi. Next to fall were Bill and Maureen.
Bill had to travel for business both the week before and after, coming home
only for the weekend. Maureen had to go to a conference the following week,
and therefore had to fly out on Sunday night. That just left Richard.

I dropped Richard an email asking if he was going. His response was
something to the effect of "Aw, I don't know. I have the kids that weekend,
it's a long drive, I don't know. We will probably just hang out locally." I
knew I would have more luck twisting Richard's arm than anyone else's so I
started in.

I started hitting him with comments like "You can probably score a Pyrhanna
Ina-Zone for short money at the Moose." I knew he had been thinking about
getting one, so it seemed like a good opening. I also offered to bring along
my portable CD player so each kid would have their own for the weekend (no
music battles). I told him how wonderful a time the kids would have, even if
they didn't realize it yet. I even pointed out that the kids would have fun
playing with the campfire. And of course, you can't forget the Muffin
Patch!!!

Finally he conceded. I knew he had when he asked me if I thought we could
get gear and 4 boats to New York in his Honda CR-V. The answer was yes once
we added a 78 inch set of roof bars and a rocket box. Thursday night before
the trip I went over and we packed. After several iterations, we came up
with a way to get all the boats (a Vertigo, a Topolino Single, a RPM MAX,
and a Redline) on the roof while still being able to open the Rocket Box
enough to load it. We had a debate about whether or not we were road legal.
We decided the answer was "probably". We had all the gear in the vehicle,
though, and still had space for 4 passengers!!!

Friday after work (6:15 to 2:30 for me) we met at Richard's house and loaded
the kids in the Honda. We were off!!! Now we only had 312 miles to go
(according to MapQuest). Initially the kids (Patrick, 12 and Sam, 10) were a
bit fussy as kids always are at the start of a long trip, but quickly
settled down when we put on some music that they liked (Nine Inch Nails,
Tool, etc.) and Richard offered them a mid-afternoon snack of Slim Jims and
Mountain Dew.

We drove for what seemed like an eternity, stopping on the New York Thruway
for dinner and then plowing on through to Singing Waters Campground in
McKeever, NY. Amazingly enough, just the bathroom break at dinner was enough
for the kids (the spirits were certainly shining brightly upon us this
weekend). We made the campground at around 10:30 at night, made camp, helped
the kids mess around with a small campfire (their reward for being
well-behaved on the ride out), and crashed around Midnight.

Saturday morning we talked with a fellow MVPer (Tim White), and he said the
river was way up, could end up being a real big run. His group had decided
to forgo the Bottom Moose (the traditional Class IV-V run) in favor of the
III-IV Lower Moose (bear with me on the names, they are a tale in
themselves).

We were supposed to meet them at the put-in and decide what we were going to
do. Unfortunately, we got our lines crossed, and never met them. As a result
we said the heck with it (it looked a bit big for Patrick and Sam
anyway, who are competent class III paddlers in all respects but their
rolls, which need work). For those who worry, we were planning to carry the
kids boats around the big drops like Froth Hole, Mixmaster, and Elevator
Shaft. We headed back to the campground and launched onto the Class II-III
Middle Branch of the Moose from our campsite (literally out the backside of
the site).

We get through the first couple rapids and we come upon a group of people
putting up a lot of commotion waving us over to the left bank of the river
at the top of a rapid. There is a half-river wide strainer on the river, but
I think I could miss it even in my sleep. It turns out that the rapid in
question is Nelson's Falls, an easy Class IV drop. We look it over, help the
kids carry their boats down the drop, and watch a couple paddlers run it
without incident. We agree that we could also, but decide to carry it
instead (setting a good example for the kids). Besides, if we did run it
(and play it as well), we would probably get hit by an over-anxious
throwbag. There was a lot of debate about whether or not the two big
recirculating holes were sticky enough to hold on to you or not, but we
decided that they were not (at this level). Watching people come through
seemed to confirm this, as not everyone carried a lot of momentum through
the holes.

The river continued on with a mix of Solid Class III and III+ rapids
(remember I said this was supposed to be a II-III run) mixed in with
quickwater and long flatwater sections. Nonetheless, there was plenty of
interesting action in the Class III rapids. We finally made it to the first
takeout (the Route 28 Bridge) and Richard was saying "Come on, lets run it
to the put-in for the lower." So we kept on plugging (slogging our way
through what seemed like a mile long stretch of slow moving flatwater. We
finally make it to a rapid and it is melodramatic at best. At this point, we
are committed to finishing the run, though. We can hear the road, but it
would be a 40 foot climb up a steep banking. The climb out was perfectly
feasible if needed, but not my idea of fun... We hit another couple short
rapids with some play opportunities, and kept on going...

We came around the bend and there is another rapid. Sam was dragging behind,
and Richard said "Why don't you take Patrick down this and I will follow
with Sam in a minute." So off I go, scouting as I paddle. We twist and turn
down the river, running a difficult Class III rapid (at this water level,
lower levels would make it much easier I expect), finally hitting a pool to
take a breather. Patrick and I sat in the pool panting a little bit, feeling
good about what we had just paddled. He had paddled excellently, following
my line about 40 feet behind me, avoiding any interesting "river features"
that I had found while paddling.

The pool had two exit options, left and right. Left was a reasonably
turbulent looking rapid with plenty of water. Right was a even-looking
horizon line. I thought we should go left since I was worried there would be
a nice hydraulic on the drop on the right. Fortunately for me I was correct
(that left was a reasonable choice). Left was a nice rollercoaster run, and
down we went. We ran the rapid out, passing a huge (15 or 20 foot tall)
glacial erratic in the river which had a nice hole just before it that
rodeo'd me a little bit. Patrick followed me down through without incident.
We stopped and hung out on the rocks in the sun waiting for Richard and Sam.
The ledges were a nice slope where there was plenty to see and just soak in
nature.

They arrived in a couple minutes and we took a break of Mountain Dew, King
Oscar Sardines in Salsa, and beat-up old granola bars that I had in my
drybag. Richard told me that he and Sam elected to run right of the island
and indeed there was a river-wide feature. Sam dropped in, endered,
flat-spinned a full 360, surfed it across and came out the other side,
apparently with a smile on his face the whole time... The kids had fun
climbing around on the ledges, and we all took a well-deserved break. One of
the kids found the remnants of a broken paddle way high on the rocks (it
must have been one heck of a flood) and we just basked in the sun.

We got back on the river (Sam and myself seal-launching), and started down
only to see we were at the takeout... There was one more optional rapid to
run, so we did and called it a beautiful day on the river. When we were
done, Sam and Patrick even admitted that they had fun, but the flatwater was
boring and tiring (I agree...). Richard thumbed a ride back to the campsite
while I took care of the kids.

The kids discovered that there were Milkweed pods on the side of the river,
and that if you hit them, they released their silk and seeds. (If you were
on the Moose River road around 5 PM on Saturday and saw a white haze coming
at you, it was probably Patrick and Sam having fun). This kept them occupied
for about an hour while Richard rode shuttle with a kind couple who happened
to be driving by.

That night we headed off for dinner and then the festival. We saw several
friends at the festival and browsed what the big companies were offering up
for the following year. True to my plan, I even got some Christmas shopping
done.

Sunday was occupied by picture-taking and watching paddlers at Fowlersville
Falls, Agers Falls, and Crystal Falls. The best part was to watch the look
on paddlers faces when I offered to send them free pictures if they gave me
their addresses.

When all that was done, we headed out of town and north on Route 28. We
decided to take the "Scenic Route" home to New Hampshire. Much to our
surprise, the computer reported it was only 292 miles this way. We started
trucking and then realized that we had not had the obligatory pizza of a
paddling trip. We stopped for pizza, later for Ben and Jerry's in Rutland,
VT, and then headed on home.

All in all, a very long weekend with a very high car time to paddle time
ratio (2 hours drive for every hour on the river), but a great weekend with
excellent memories nonetheless. So who wants to start planning for next
year???


