Subject: Mt. Hancock, 1/8/2000
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 2000 17:32:56 -0500 (EST)
From: "David G. Andersen" <dga@lcs.mit.edu>

Mt. Hancock Loop Trail

  Ben, Brian, Dave, Devan, Ian, Luke, Millie

The day started the night before, when transportation confusion
threatened to cast the first dark cloud over the trip.  Happily,
however, all of the hikers (and trip leaders) made it to the
cabin without problems.  We breathed a sigh of relief, and
settled down for a luxurious four hours of sleep.

6am is a swear word in several cultures, but the cabin was
so comfortably warm that on Saturday morning, it proved
quite easy to get up.  The cabin was still dark, of course,
so I'm sure the other people attending Winter School have
already forgiven us for flipping on the lights to locate
the members of the Hancook Loop Trail group at that hour...

And perhaps yelling a bit.

And leaving the lights on.

Um.  But you wanted to hear about the trip, and not the
identities of the nefarious morning people, so we'll move along now.

The loop trail which hits the north and south peaks of
Mt. Hancock leaves from the hairpin turn on the Kancamangus
Highway.  We got an excellent early start (see above), and
began trekking by about 9am.  The trail begins in a
very straightforward fashion with a barely uphill
hike along a forested riverside trail, allowing good
opportunities to adjust shoes and packs, and remove
excess polyester.  We continued along the deceptively
gentle beginning, until we caught up with another group
donning crampons by the trail split to the North and South
peaks.

Undoubtedly, this was the beginning of what Chrissy had warned us
about, described in the book as "Unrelentingly Steep."
Most of the crampons were donned without too many problems,
though Luke had to get creative with the straps on one
or two pairs.  But at last, we were cramponned and
ready to ascend.

The hill is steep.

The hill is _very_ steep.

But the view from the top of both peaks of Mt. Hancock was
incredible.  The day was beautiful, with excellent
visibility and a bright blue sky, and from the outlooks
on Mt. Hancock you could see for miles.  The hike along
the "ridge" (a very wide ridge) between the mountains
was relaxing, and the descent from the North Peak was
relaxing in a running-in-crampons sort of way.

We arrived back at our cars after about seven hours of
travelling, hungry enough to devour the pizzas we
ordered at Elvio's.

In all, the trip was extremely successful.  The weather
was marvelous, the hiking companions a joy to walk with,
and we even managed to get down before dark on a
moderately strenuous (10 mile) hike in wintertime.

   -Dave

(For the record, we highly recommend doing the South peak of Mt. Hancock
first, as the descent down from the North peak is much more pleasant).
