Mt. Moosilauke via the Glencliff Trail
(a PPP-Free Expeditions Production)
~8.4 miles, 3000' ascent

-----

Everyone's been complaining for weeks that we weren't having any real
winter weather.  Well, now we've had some real winter weather!  Brrr.

The team, Paul, Simon, Olivera, Peter, Richard, Sebastian, and a
stuffed Octopus, met at MIT quite close to the 6am meeting time.  All
the steps taken to avoid Piss-Poor-Planning were quickly tested to the
extreme.  One person (a driver) had to drop out after a slip and fall
during the Boston snowstorm.  Then, another car sustained a flat tire
on the way to the meeting place.  We commandeered a spare vehicle
(thanks, Paul, for the last-minute ride), loaded up, and got onto the
road a mere 15 minutes late.  Upon arrival at our rendezvous point in
Lincoln, we realized that some equipment had been misplaced in our
game of musical cars, so an extra pair of snowshoes was quickly
located at Lincoln Ski and Bike.  Still, we arrived at the trailhead a
bit later than we had wanted--it wasn't quite a classic 11am "MIT
Alpine Start" (ahem) but enough to eliminate some of our free time for
the day.

The Glencliff Trail takes the AT up the western ridge of
Mt. Moosilauke.  It's a long and somewhat tedious climb, but perfect
practice for longer and taller hikes in the Presidentials.  We started
out in chilly, sunny, -5F weather, soon dropped layers of clothing as
the trail began a long sidehill ascent.  Bare, frozen ground was
replace by light, dry powder by the 3000' level, and the climbing
became slightly steeper and trickier due to a base of ice-glazed rock.
Crampons weren't useful at all during the climb due to lack of
anything to bite, and the light powder barely provided enough
substance to pack down a trail.  We moved quickly, stopping briefly
every 15 minutes to hydrate and snack.  Everyone soon grew a
shimmering mantle of rime ice (some more than others) as we steamed
and panted our way uphill.  The pace was grueling--with snow and cold
temperatures expected that night, we had to get up and down as quickly
as possible--but everyone stuck with it and showed excellent stamina
and efficient equipment management.

The snow deepened considerable as we passed the 4000' mark and climbed
steeply up the side of Moosilauke's South Peak.  The light tracks we'd
been following for the past 2.5 miles detoured up a set of unmapped
ledges, so we found ourselves breaking trail though knee-deep powder
up a few more steep sections.  We arrived at the junction with the
Carriage Road by 1pm, and immediately geared up for the 1.5 mile
round-trip across the summit ridge.

Fortunately, the sun shone brightly, the wind was amazingly light, and
a clear view to the horizon indicated that no meterological surprises
were in store.  After a somewhat longer rest stop to eat, drink, and
fumble with equipment and clothing, we pushed through the low scrub
onto the exposed snowfields.  All the little problems soon
surfaced--fussy crampons popped off on contact with hidden rocks, and
the pair of snowshoes rented in Lincoln (probably made for easy walks
in the woods) rebelled angrily against the terrain demands.  Everyone
learned that simple tasks can be extremely difficult above treeline
with bulky overmitts and fogged goggles.  Planning and practice, as
always, was key.  Conditions were excellent for NH in January, though,
and all of our safety gear was useful but optional.  You could
bare-boot the whole ridge (stepping carefully), and some of us did.
The summit gave us endless views of Franconia Ridge, the
Presidentials, the Pemi, and most of NH and VT over a wide expanse of
frozen scrub and sculpted sastrugi snow.  The temperature hovered
around zero, and the wind was steady in the mid-20s.

After the standard photo opportunities were exploited, we hurried back
down the ridge to the shelter of the scrub.  Back at the trail
junction, we took a five-minute lunch break and dressed for a rapid
descent.  The soft snow was too soft to glissade and too deep for
self-arrest practice, so we simply flew down the trail at top speed.
We arrived at the car right at sunset, keeping to the No-PPP principle
that headlamps are only for emergencies!  Dinner at Woodstock Station
once again.

Thanks to everyone for a great trip, and for sticking with a grueling
uphill and downhill pace.  Next stop--the Presidentials!

-Matt


