Franconia-Garfield ridges
January 15-17

(not a winterschool trip)

JD Albert '97, Barrett Comiskey '97, Holly Gates '98, Ben Polito '99,
and Daniel Richelson spent 3 days in the pemigewasset wilderness this
past weekend.  We drove up Friday night in two aging Toyotas,
shuttling vehicles, then crashing in the Lafayette Place campground.
Next day dawned clear and cold, and we packed up and hiked the Bridle
Path and Greenleaf to Lafayette summit, which was windy and cold but
afforded remarkable views in all directions.  We shared the
well-broken trail with scads of dayhikers.

>From the summit we proceeded north on the Garfield ridge trail,
encountering knee-deep powder drifts as soon as we dropped below
treeline.  Available beta and the snow drought had emboldened us to go
without snowshoes, and we wished we had them then.  As dusk approached
we pitched camp in the trees on a pleasant bench and set to the task
of melting enough water for Sunday's hiking.  We woke the next morning
to find light snow falling, and the snow intensified as we hiked
towards Garfield, adding to the snowcover, which was 1.5-2 feet deep
on average and reached thigh or hip levels in drifts.  Breaking trail
in these conditions proved challenging (this is an understatement).
It is possible, however, and fortunately there were 5 of us to share
the work.  

As we reached the summit of Garfield and began our descent the deep
snow changed from a hindrance to a pleasure, as we boot-skied and
glissaded a steep and moderately iced trail that would otherwise
required us to use our crampons.  We reached the 13 Falls campsite and
pitched out just as night fell.  The sky cleared and the wind picked
up as we hunkered down in the tents for the night.  

Monday morning was the coldest of the weekend.  We later found out
that temperatures reached -28 degrees in cold spots, which the valley
floor of Franconia Brook surely was.  It was a challenge to keep our
feet and fingers warm, despite double boots and glove/mitt systems.
We ate a cold breakfast and hit the trail as fast as possible, making
good time through the snow (only 8-12 inches in the valley) down to
the car we left at the pemi parking lot.  Remarkably, the car started
despite 3 nights well below zero, as did the one we left in Franconia
Notch, and we retreated to Lincoln for beer, burgers, and equivalent
vegetarian fare.

Conclusions: Quality equipment is a pleasure.  Marginal equipment is a
drag at best, dangerous at worst.  Brand new zero-degree bags are
apparently OK in substantially sub-zero temps.  Well-worn zero-degree
bags most definately are not.  One down jacket is worth several
fleeces for standing around camp.  Bring spare glove liners and dry
damp ones in the bag at night.  Melting snow takes a long time.  Fuel
usage including melting snow and two hot meals per day was 6
person*meals/quart.  Cut up cheese, butter, chocolate, and power bars
before setting out to avoid pain and suffering.  Putting chunks of
butter in everything is a good way to pound down needed extra
calories.  Frozen butter tastes pretty good straight.  Single boots
plus supergaiters do not equal double boots.  Koflach Degre is a
wicked comfortable boot.

New England winters don't suck so much after all.

Happy trails,

