Winter School Trip Report:      The Legend of the Worthy Camelot Skiers
--------------------------

Trip: Robert "i was hit by a standing car" Zeithammer (leader), 
Karen Sachs, Ronny Krashinsky, and Paulina  Varchavskaia
Dates: 15-17 Jan. 2000

-----

Disclaimer: The following is the tale of our glorious trip, in detail, and in 
chronological order of no importance. All opinions expressed here are solely min
e.
All facts, however, are true, and any resemblance with real characters is wholly
intentional.

The start of the weekend wasn't promising at all.
The four of us plus a certain Adam were supposed to drive to Camelot on
Saturday morning with some XC skis and some chainsaws. The four of us turned up
at the student centre at 6:30am, looking forward to a good weekend of wood-
cutting and trail-cleaning (and some skiing). When it became clear
that a certain Adam would not turn up or answer our calls, we had to drop
the chainsaws, together with all hopes of cutting wood, and squeeze with our
skiing equipment into two cars from another trip, whose leader Susan was so 
good-hearted she wouldn't leave us stranded in Cambridge. Huge thanks
to the drivers from Susan's trip, or you wouldn't be reading this.

So, off we went and arrived safely to Camelot late in the morning. Unpacked, 
started fire (yes, inside the stove, although Robert did mention the "cabins
have burnt down" game more than once on our way there - ask him for details),
sorted out skis and boots and started our adventure in the treacherous woods
of New Hampshire. It soon transpired that we can't really find ski trails on 
MITOC property without chainsaws. So we walked down the road a little and were
quickly rewarded for our efforts and bravery whith a "no trespassing"
sign on what really seemed like a good ski trail off the road. After 
surprisingly little hesitation we decided to break the law, and thus discovered
a new skiing territory hitherto unknown to MITOC-man. 

That day the snow was frozen on top and unforgiving. Only our valorous leader
Robert "I can't walk but I can ski cause I've been hit by a standing car" 
managed to stay balanced the whole time. Despite the dire conditions,
Karen was doing great, and enjoying her ski-learning experience, Rony was
simply good at it, and Paulina "I haven't skied in 10 years" got up every time
she fell down. We explored the new-found road in chunks, and it only ever got 
better. The first day didn't pass without accidents, though, as Rony fell on icy
snow and scraped his hand. The scene was bloody, but the two members of our
team with WFA education rushed selflessly at their peer's rescue... only to 
discover that none of them had brought a first-aid kit. Duh! Luckily some people
present (I hate to be specific but it WAS me) who didn't go to the first-aid 
lectures, just happened to have bandages with them. Thank you, thank you.
Our injured friend was in good shape anyway, and so we continued skiing for a 
while and then returned to the cabin for the ultimate winter outdoors experience
:
sitting in front of a fire with a hot cup of tea.

In the night, temperatures outside were below 0F (-20C), so Karen and Paulina 
wisely stayed in the cabin, while Ronny and Robert set up a tent outside. The
plan for the next day was to explore our new skiing trail to the full and make 
a map (attached in GIF format) for the use of future generations. On Sunday 
morning, Karen went home with Susan's team. It was snowing pretty much all day, 
about 5in of fresh powder snow was on the ground, and so the skiing was much 
more enjoyable. 

So here is a detailed description of the Camelot XC skiing area with directions:

>From the parking lot, walk down the road (downhill) for about 1/2 mile (we were
actually able to ski down because of all the snow on the road),
until you see a sign saying "nedeaus", a gate in front of a large track,
and lots of "no trespassing" signs on the trees around it. Turn onto it (it's 
very easy to just walk or ski around the gate) and here's your skiing trail.
If you are concerned about breaking the law, rest assured that locals ski there
all the time, as we found out later.
The main road goes on for about 3 1/2 miles and you can't miss it. Just go 
forward and up (mostly) until you come to a ploughed road with a power line on 
the sides. Follow that to the left and then turn right onto Ashley lane, which 
leads to a meadow with a great view, a house, and two telescopes. Passing the
house on the left and going into the forest, you will find a track that will 
loop back to the ploughed road. Turn right to go back to the original trail.
In the other direction, the downhill was too steep for us, so we don't know 
where it leads.
If you go back on your tracks, you will find the journey back home a pleasant
downhill. In general, on the way there we were mostly able to ski up, the 
"ladder" or "pine-tree" steps were only really necessary on Ashley lane.
There are a couple of side-tracks you can take: one leads to a Christmas tree
farm, and another to a meadow with a slight elevation (more like a large bump) -
marked "Ronny's Fall Meadow" on the map - where you can practice your telemarkin
g
technique :-). A track leads farther from the meadow, which we weren't able to
explore due to fallen trees on our way.

On Sunday night, we were joined at the cabin by Luke's trip members and proceede
d
to a great evening of silliness (details in person from embarrassed individuals,
 
but we have photos to prove it!). At night the temperatures reached -20F (-32C)
outside, so everyone on our trip slept inside the cabin. And on Monday morning,
we were off home.

This report is probably a tad too long for what the trip really was but I liked
writing it, so tough luck. In conclusion, let me just say again how highly I 
recommend XC skiing in general, and sleeping in a warm cabin when it's -20F 
outside, in particular. See you all at the lecture tonight

Paulina Varchavskaia

P.S. No matter what evil tongues say, my flask was VERY popular on our trip -
could have anything to do with its hot contents? er...

[Note:  Map for the trip can be found at:
  <a href="89-map.gif">89-map.gif</a>]
