Intervale XC ski trip, 01/15/2000

After having half of my trip find convenient excuses to stay in Boston
this weekend the remaining four of us, Seth, Stephanie, Daniel, and
myself gathered at the student center for a not-quite on time departure.
Thanks to the low numbers, I was able to leave my truck in Boston for
the first time ever on a MITOC trip and leave the driving up to the able
Seth (more on this later!).

After a quick stop to carbo-load at McDonald's and another quick stop at
the grocery store and the final quick stop to unfrost the inside of the
car windows (remember that A/C can be used in the winter to reduce the
fogging of windows!) we made it up to the cabin. Half of us slept
outside, trying out some new gear while the other half battled for space
in the cabin.

The next morning, after cursing two waves of "quiet" departures of other
trips we finally got some restful sleep and awoke around 8AM to a
gorgeous sunny, cold day. After a mellow hour of preparation for the day
we headed off to Jackson XC where we discovered that they had built a
new day lodge across from the Red Fox Inn. We hit the trail at 10:30 and
promptly discovered that poor Stephanie had received a pair of waxable
skis from MITOC and we didn't have any wax! Needless to say, this made
her first time on skis quite a bit more difficult than anticipated.
However, she conquered the first hill and the next, and the next until
it was time to turn around and learn the art of going downhill, with no
control, on two skinny sticks, with independent minds. After many
crashes we all made it back to the trailhead and went off to the next
area to ski some more. We were greeted with views of Carter Dome and
wondered how the other group was doing. After skiing for a couple more
hours we returned to the car just as darkness was falling.

We cruised by the cabin and picked up Carolyn and then headed off to
Tuckerman's Tavern for a wonderful dinner and tasty beverages. We then
returned to the now "slightly aromatic" cabin where Dave was attempting
to do laundry and air himself out to no success. After swapping stories
and adding a few quotes to the "quote board" we settled in for the
night. 

We awoke the next morning to 3 inches of fresh snow with more falling.
Most of the other groups decided to return to Boston right after
breakfast. However, our group decided to take advantage of the fresh
snow and the sleds in the yurt. For the record, two people / sled in
reverse wins all the speed and distance competitions, thought avoiding
trees and bushes can be a bit more problematic! The sledding competition
award however, must go to Ken (who joined us for a ride back to Boston
after having his trip leader, no names here Pat, abandoned him) who left
a perfect imprint of his face in a snowbank after a rather impressive
face first decent! After two hours of blasting through snow drifts and
getting copious amounts of snow down our pants we turned to ice axe
practice. The fresh snow wasn't quite slick enough to practice on so we
improvised with sleds, but I think everyone learned the technique after
a few tries. It's always interesting to note how difficult getting into
the correct technique can be...

Following a nice lunch in the cabin we returned to Boston stopping once
to use the restrooms and take advantage of a large snowy parking lot for
some driving practice. Seth gets a 9 out of 10 on the Dave Custer
Drive-o-matic scale. He would have only received an 8 but managed to
incite other vehicles into also doing doughnuts and 4-wheel slides in
the parking lot. After getting dizzy from going around in circles for 15
minutes we returned to Boston as one safe happy group!

Respectfully Submitted,

Scott "we had a 125% return rate!" FitzGerald
