Mt. Osceola: January 29, 2000
__________________________

Trip Members: Pat Brown, Ben Ingram, Sunil Tankha, Darrel Robertson

This was an incredible day trip that combined cross-country skiing and 
steep hiking on the awesome Mt. Osceola.  I would highly recommend this as 
an adventurous, difficult level winter day trip with some of the best views 
of the White Mountains!

A non-existent alarm clock and too much time enjoying the Plymouth Dunkin 
Donuts created a late 10:15 start for our group from the Livermore Road in 
Waterville Valley.  We then delayed ourselves again by following the wrong 
trail for 30 minutes, but in the process got valuable practice on our 
cross-country skis.  Since neither Sunil nor myself had cross-country skied 
before, the going was often slow and interspersed with wipe outs as we made 
our way up the Greeley Ponds Trail towards Mad River Notch, although Ben 
and Darrel managed along just fine on their skis.  The slight uphill along 
previous ski tracks was well worth the effort when we reached Greeley Ponds 
and were treated with amazing views of Mt. Osceola's and Mt. Kancamangus' 
cliffs on either side of us.  We continued on along the trail in the warm 
30 degree weather and finally reached the junction with the Mt. Osceola 
Trail at 2pm.

After many conversations with other hikers about the steepness of the trail 
leading to the East Peak of Osceola and our late start time, we were faced 
with the tough decision of whether or not to continue onwards to Mt. 
Osceola.  We all agreed that we could afford to ski most of the trail in 
the dark on our return trip, but wouldn't want to descend the steep 
mountain trail in the dark, so we agreed on a 3:30 turn-around time that 
would allow this to happen.  After a quick change from our ski gear into 
winter hiking boots, crampons, and ice axes, we began our charge up the 
mountain.  We quickly discovered how steep the trail actually was, as we 
ascended in the woods parallel to an impressive cliff face for 600 vertical 
feet.  Rigid boots with step-in crampons were easily the favorite on this 
tough uphill, as half of the 2000 vertical feet to East Peak required 
front-pointing!  We pushed on relentlessly, while knowing that our 3:30 
time was quickly approaching and that another hiker required 3 1/2 hours to 
reach East Peak.  With no expectations of summitting, at 3:28 we were 
suddenly treated with a bright glimpse of sunlight ahead on the trail, 
indicating that we'd reached the summit ridge with views to the west.  We 
quickly scampered along the almost vertical trail to the East Peak summit 
at exactly 3:30!  This narrow, 10 foot wide ridge dropped off abruptly on 
three sides, creating an amazing open feeling in the cool, windy air, with 
a low-set sun highlighting most the White Mountains, including the southern 
Presidentials, the Franconia ridge, the Pemigewasset wilderness, the 
Kancamangus region, and the steep Tri-Pyramids!  Wow, what a perfect 
summit!  We had certainly earned our way up there, so we enjoyed the view 
and photography for a few short minutes, but then quickly began our descent 
back to Greeley Ponds.

With our skis and heavily loaded packs back on, we started the downhill ski 
back to the trailhead.  Unfortunately, descending on cross country skis and 
narrow trails with a heavy pack, low light, and little to no previous 
experience proved to be a tough experience that ultimately sent Sunil and I 
walking at a quick pace instead of subjecting ourselves to painful 
wipeouts!  As the trail leveled, we all returned to our skis and found a 
nice pace along the dark, non-moonlit trail for several miles back to the 
parking lot.  So at 7pm, we had safely, successfully finished our trip and 
were ready for greasy pizza, a warm fire at Camelot, and a good night's rest!

Pat
