(Ice climbing with Hector Briceno at Newfound Lake, NH
Saturday, Feb 5, 2000.  This wasn't an official MITOC
trip - we were going to meet up with the Mt. Washington
group on Sunday - but it was fun anyway.  This TR leaves
out much of the detail of the day, and ignores some
really nice ice climbing by Hector, and some of the
more amusing - but unrelated - stories.  Sorry.  You'll have
to write your own TR, Hector. :-) (* - see disclaimer at end)

Sometimes, life hands you a really big carrot.

On Saturday, I felt like Bugs Bunny in the farmer's field.

I'd gone to sleep at 4:00 that morning, and Hector had
called at quarter to five to awaken me for our ice climbing
trip.  I scrambled out of bed (about a 5.9, unroped), dumped
hot water in my bottles, managed to splash a little water
on my face, and met Hector just as he pulled up outside
my apartment.

An interesting start to the day, but during the two hour
drive to Newfound Lake, NH, I managed to get a few catnaps,
and was fairly awake by the time we arrived.

Newfound Lake looked weird.  It had obviously been found,
because the surface was dotted with strange little huts
from which strange little people were trying to catch
strange little fish.  One ice fisher was actually using
half of a schoolbus as their ice hut.  Impressive.

A quick approach, and we discovered that we were the first
ice climbers at the cliff.  Excellent!  This is my first
season ice climbing (I can still count the number of times
I've been, so that should speak volumes), but I decided
that I wanted to do some leading on ice.  An interesting
decision, considering my inexperience, but I'd started to
feel very comfortable on lower angled ice, and love leading
rock, so I figured I'd try.  Or, perhaps I just hadn't
had enough sleep.  Hard to say.

I conservatively scoped out an easier-looking flow on the
right side of the cliff, while hector decided on a really
nice fat flow of ice up the middle.  He took the first lead,
and started climbing as other parties began to trickle
in.  While the other parties started leading the route
I'd looked at, Hector started heading up the middle route -
a really nice, wide WI 3 (?? I don't have this grading thing
down quite yet.  Maybe a bit easier;  only short sections of
vertical ice).  He was a bit hesitant at first, which
I attributed to the fact that our rack consisted mostly
of stubby BD express screws.  Cute, fast, and scary.

Eventually, Hector topped out after doing a solid job of
leading the route, and asked what I wanted to do.  Since
by now there were lots of other people around, I shouted
up that he should rappel, and I'd lead the same route.
"The pro is pretty thin, Dave.  You might want to follow
it first and then lead it!" he shouted.  "Nah.  I want
to lead it.  C'mon down!"

Erm.  I can be a little stubborn at times.

Hector rappelled, and cleaned the route.  One of the people waiting at
the base, Mark, was there with a family friend whom he was taking ice
climbing as a 16th birthday present.  Katie took to the ice like
water, and was running up the routes.  Mark was about to lead the flow
to the right of mine as I was getting racked up, so we chatted briefly
- he's from Wyoming, and we share a common passion for the City of
Rocks, Idaho.  He noticed my rather meager ice rack.
"Would you like to borrow some longer screws?"
I happily obliged, stealing two of his full length
ice screws, and started climbing up.

The first part of the route is pretty easy.  The ice was
perfect - it was about 32 degrees that day, and the tools
were sticking like glue.  Yum!  Eventually, I got to a section
of the route by a big chunk of granite, where it looked
like I'd be able to get a good stopper placement, but the
crack turned out to be much smaller than it appeared
from the ground, and no nuts would quite go in it.
No problem:  I'll place my first ice screw!

(Hush.  It was my first time off the ground.  It
was exciting).

The screw went in smoothly, and I started climbing up again,
and about twenty feet later placed another.  I was having a blast.
The climb was gentle - it gave you rest spots in all the right
places where you could stand flatfooted on a bulge, calm down,
and place pro.  This was happy.

The climb continued up, meandering around some thick
icicles.  I got a nice stance with a tool hooked inside of
a big column of icicles, and stemmed out with my crampons
between the sides of the small ice chute I found myself
in, and started placing another screw.  This time, my luck
wasn't quite as good, and each time I twisted the screw
in, the ice would fracture around it.

That's not a good feeling.  But happily, at this time,
Mark pulled up on the route next to me, and I blushed,
glanced over, "So, I have another stupid newbie question
for you, if you have time?"  "Go ahead," he replied
amicably.  I described the fracturing problem, and he
pointed out that I was placing the screw into a bulge,
and that I should look for screw placements like I'd
look for pick placements.  Ah-ha!  I followed his advice,
and the screw went in much more happily.  Soon, I was
off again.  The top of the pitch was tricky - a bulge
of vertical ice, with a grundle of snow on top, so
the tool placements were insecure.  But I had a great
nut a few feet below me, and managed to avoid doing
too much damage to the sapling I hooked pulling myself
over the top.

I wandered up the few feet of lower-angled snow,
tied off onto a belay tree, and danced a little
jig - I'd survived my first ice lead!

It's interesting.  Leading a pretty easy ice climb
(from the follower's or top-roper's) perspective
is a vastly more challenging experience.  Placements
where as a second I'd just hook and cruise past,
on lead I felt the need to sink my tool into.
A much less secure experience than leading
on rock, but very fun, too.

I got down, and Mark, Katie, Hector, and the party
next to us all congratulated me.  What a nice
warm fuzzy feeling.

We finished the day with a few more easy leads, and
a borrowed toprope on a mixed climb that Mark put
up.  It was an incredible day - the weather may have
been the best I've seen since moving to New England,
Hector was extremely patient as I bumbled and muttered
my way up the climb, and the other climbers around
us were equally patient as I wasted time on the climb,
and all were exceptionally great companions for the
day.  My hat goes off to all of them, including the
people whose names I never caught but were climbing
the routes to the right of us.

Love them carrots!

(*) Disclaimer:  Please note that I don't advocate leading ice 
when  you're still pretty much a novice, which I am.  I'm a pretty
experienced rock climber, and more importantly, I'm a moron.
Caveat Emptor.

   -Dave
