Trip report: Extreme sledding

Ok, well maybe not EXTREME.......  :)

This past weekend, Intervale was taken over by approximately
1/4-1/3 of all the graduate women in the physics department,
with the intention of doing a little snowshoeing, hiking,
skiing or sledding, in addition to recovering from the
trauma of physics PhD qualifying exams.

We departed MIT 3.5 hours after part II, and despite a traffic-filled
detour through Somerville, the car with the keyholder in it still 
managed to get to the cabin and turn on the heater before the other
car (which had made an unexpected detour through Glouchester.).
Expecting a full day, we turned in for an early night.

The next morning, after a lovely breakfast of cereal and hot tea,
we chose to forgo more sophisticated amusements and take advantage of 
the wonderful kindness of whoever left 5 sleds at the cabin!  A quick
stop at a convenience store in N. Conway revealed the local favorite
sledding spot, Hurricane Mt. Road:  heading North out of N. Conway
on 16, take the right immediately BEFORE the 16A turnoff for the
cabin, drive about 2 miles until the road dead-ends into a section
not maintained for winter travel, park wherever you can find it.
Walking up the road, the first quarter to half a mile are steep
downhill with lots of turns, well packed down by the occasional 
snowmobile into a VERY slick track.  After a couple hours of
running uphill and some spectacular wipeouts, we went back to the cabin
for lunch, and then some of us spent the afternoon turning the
path to the cabin into a wild sled ride complete with a wicked
jump.  FYI:  with enough packing down of snow, it is possible to
make it all the way from above Intervale II to the bottom of the
hill without stopping!! :)  

After a lovely pasta dinner, and successfully defending our 
territory from buff men and women bearing ice axes and crampons,
we turned in for a nice, long night of sleep that had nothing to
do with 4AM alpine starts.  :)

In the morning, we cleaned the cabin, said farewell to the part of 
our group that actually already had problem sets to do...or cryostats
to refill....and headed for Cathedral ledge with the sleds.  After
considering some of the slopes at the bottom of the cliff, and
discarding them as too dangerous EVEN for Julia and Lia :), we took
on a short steep section of unplowed road to the right of the cliff
face.  A few very fast, difficult to control runs (as well as close
encounters of the snowmobile kind) convinced us that we should go
looking for less travelled slopes.  Unfortunately, by that time
traffic was already getting bad on 16, so we dropped the sleds back
off at the cabin and headed home.

Lessons of the trip:

1.  Sledding is a thrilling, dirt-cheap way to enjoy winter.
2.  It is very difficult to think about lab work or exams when
    you are airborne on a thin piece of plastic.
3.  Always check the web page before heading to one of the MITOC cabins!

Good luck with your semester, lab-work, etc.!

:)

Rebecca
