Mt. Haystack
Saturday, Jan 22, 2000  (winterschool week three)

Dave Andersen, Brian DeDecker, Ronny Krashinsky,
Stephanie Kyriazis, Janet Lindow, Devon McCullough.


  Needles of Wind on Haystack:
    breaking in a new leader.


Mt. Haystack lies on a ridge with Mt. Lincoln and Mt. Lafayette.
We planned to hike to each of these peaks during our Saturday
hike, for a nice 8.7 mile hike with "lots of exposure."

Plans, as they say, are subject to change without notice.

Before The Hike
---------------

Friday night, a miscommunication left two of our party driving
to Camelot without a car to follow.  In the lead car, we
didn't yet realize that this was a problem, so we made our
merry way in Brian's car to Camelot.

Ahh, Camelot.  Warm, happy Camelot.  Hmm.  Empty, dark Camelot.
Perfectly easy situation to fix - we'll just go in and start
a fire in the stove!

We'll go in.  We'll use a key to unlock the front door.
Um.  A key?  It seems that our trip leader had forgotten
to check out a key from the office before departing.
This necessitated a quick trip back to town and back,
where we tried (in vain) to ascertain if another party
was coming up on Friday night.

Finally, we gave up, and entered the cabin by alternate means.
Soon, a fire was burning in the woodstove, and four out of
six campers were happily nestled in front of it warming up.

Little did we know, however, that the other two campers (the ones
abandoned without a car to follow, or, as we later found out,
directions) had taken a wrong turn on North Groton Road, and were
biding their time in Rumney.  It did seem a bit peculiar that we
hadn't seen them, however, so Brian and I drove back to Rumney to call
them.  Fortunately, Devon carried a cell phone (hey, they _do_ come in
useful), so after fumbling at a payphone for several minutes with cold
fingers, we managed to meet up with the rest of our party in Rumney
a bit after midnight.

We spent a few minutes getting gear sorted, gloves and socks
exchanged, using up the spare gloves and mitts of several people
in the party, and then realized that it was a bit after 1am.
Between the time and the weather forecast (-17 to -5 at nearby Cannon
Mountain, with a severe wind alert in effect), we decided to scale the
aim of our trip back to climb Mt. Haystack, and then see how things
seemed from there.  This proved to be a wise decision.

The Hike
--------

We slept in until about 7:30, then got up, snarfed down some food,
filled our water bottles with some fairly hot water, and drove off to
to the Mt. Lafayette trailhead on 93.  In the parking lot, we were
greeted by very cold temperatures (our cheap thermometers couldn't
quite tell, but the car thermometer suggested around -10), and 
a scathing wind which forced us to start the hike with goggles
on.  Once we got in the trees, conditions improved considerably
and soon we were happily chugging along the trail, at about 10:30.

The trail to Haystack gets somewhat steep, and after we hit that
section, the path was covered in about a foot and a half of powder.
Luckily for us, another team had broken trail for us, so the ascent
was not as grueling as it could have been.  We passed one of these
parties coming down, who mentioned that they'd quit before the
summit.  But bravely, we continued up, and eventually met up with the
other party above us, who described the summit as "rather blustery."

Blustery indeed.

We stopped at the edge of treeline to put on another insulating
layer, get our face masks and goggles on, and then we scampered
one by one to the summit.  Surprisingly, no crampons were necessary;
there was enough rock to walk on that you could avoid most of the
ice.

The summit of Little Hackstack was awesome.  The wind was blowing at
at least 50mph, and some of the gusts were strong enough to knock a
standing person over.  It was amusing that the wind was at our backs
as we ascended, so the walk up to the summit cairn took very little
effort - though you ended up a bit to the right of your actual
destination.  While cowering behind a large rock, we took in the view
of the surrounding mountains, which was great; the sky was a deep
azure blue with no clouds, and the visibility was great.  The only
drawback was that everything looked a bit orange, and removing your
goggles to see was really quite painful after ten seconds or so.

We estimate the wind chill at the summit at somewhere around -80
degrees farenheit; 50-60 mph winds with -15 to -20 degree ambient
temperatures.  We admit it.  We're kind of giddy and proud. :)

At the summit, Brian and I wondered if we could do a quick run to the
next summit; to test this, we started walking across the ridge to the
next small peak.  After 50 yards or so of nearly being pushed off the
edge of the ridge while scurrying along crouched over, we decided this
was a foolish venture, and headed back to the peak.  Other members of
the party began popping up to the summit and heading back down; after
a while at the summit, we regrouped back in our sheltered below
treeline area, and began to descend.

Coincidentally, the descent was as steep as the ascent (still reading?
:), and a few members of the party were new to glissading.  The snow
was deep and powdery, preventing all out glissading, but on many of
the steeper sections one could walk with huge sliding steps and
descend very rapidly and merrily.  By the end of the descent, we had
several new converts to glissading; Janet took to it like a fish in
snow.. er, water, and Stephanie had mastered the art of the padded
snowpant-assisted gluteal descent.  We encountered only one minor
incident on the way down, where an incorrectly laced pair of mouse
boots had created quite the glacier inside a pair of boots, but a
quick sock change and duct-tape gaiters remedied the situation.

We arrived at the parking lot at around 5:30, and headed for a
nice warm dinner at the Earl of Sandwich in Lincoln.

Yummy.

Afterword
---------

A carload of people left from the Earl, and Devon was kind enough to
drop me off at Camelot, where I hoped other parties would be showing
up soon.  Having Camelot to yourself, with a nice fire burning in the
woodstove and a cup of hot chocholate, is a remarkably relaxing
experience, even if you do worry that your transportation back to
Boston may be labeled "Greyhound."  But others soon showed up, and
started drying out for the next day.  We were warm, full, and
happy - a perfect ending to a trip that went surprisingly well.

Lessons from the trip:

* The take home lesson from this trip seems to be planning; a
  miscommunication nearly stranded two of our party: it would have been
  best to travel in a group and not make any assumptions about knowing
  the route or what "meet you there" means.  And always, always, make
  sure you have a key to the cabin.  Once we got on the actual trail, we
  were well equipped to deal with everything that came up, and things
  went quite smoothly.  It goes to show, however, that dangers exist
  outside of those found on the hike itself, and you need to prepare for
  them as much as you prepare for the outdoor component itself).

* Water bottle experiment: Janet tried using a thin (3/8"?) wrapping
  of foam around her water bottles.  This seemed to work very well.  I
  used the standard sock approach and buried mine deeply in the pack,
  which worked as well, but they were never exposed to the air.

* As has already been pointed out, duct tape and extra socks come
  in really handy.

* Haystack is a fun winter hike!
  ... but be sure to wait for low-wind conditions before continuing on.

