Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA15517; Tue, 11 Feb 97 14:11:01 EST
Received: from guardian.holonet.net by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA18045; Tue, 11 Feb 97 14:07:49 EST
Received: from lincoln (root@localhost) by holonet.net with UUCP
	id LAA08971; Tue, 11 Feb 1997 11:07:32 -0800
From: Cathy_Lavelle@lincnet.org (Cathy Lavelle)
Reply-To: Cathy_Lavelle@lincnet.org
To: RevLavelle@aol.com
Subject: trip report
Date: 11 Feb 1997 17:50:59 GMT
Message-Id: <761627.36041461@lincnet.org>
Organization: Lincoln Public Schools

A brief trip report.

This past Saturday evening, myself and my band of four merry followers (Mike,
Marc, Dave (can mitoc stand having another Dave?), and Darrel) set off for
the White mountains for a night of car camping and a day of hiking in
Franconia Notch. I even took a freshman from New Jersey even though he had no
experience because someone did the same for me 4 years ago. As we headed
north, the snow banks became quite impressive. Just north of exit 18 on 93,
at the rest stop, a foot and a half of snow had a shiny, icy crust. But in
Franconia Notch, the plowed snowbanks were head - high and encroached upon
the road signs.  We pulled into the Park campground and found a quiet spot
off a side trail to set up our tents. As far as I know, we were the only ones
there. It must have been quite a sight to see us all stomping in circles with
our snowshoes to pack down the snow for the tents. 

Everyone seemed to fair the night well, although I was quite cold in my zero
degree bag. I don't know what the temp was (do you?). It may have been
because I hadn't eaten since 4pm. To stay warm through the night, we should
have tanked up at McDonalds before going to bed.

We woke up at 7am, packed up, and headed into town at 7:45 because we needed
warm water for the hike (it was NOT because we all wanted coffee, donuts, and
breakfast sandwiches at Dunkin Donuts!  :)) With full tummies, we were back
at the trailhead by 9 and started up the Falling Waters trail to the top of
Little Haystack. Continuing on to Lincoln and Lafayette was also a
possibility.

There were many feet of snow on the trail, but hikers and snowshoers had
packed it down, so there was a 2 foot wide trail with 2 foot high "walls" on
either side. Two in the group had Bear Paw snowshoes, which caused a lot of
trouble because the packed trail was not wide enough for them. They ended up
taking them off.  The slippery snow made a few of us very aquainted with the
saying "Two steps forward, one foot back." But everyone's moral was boosted
by the brilliantly sunny sky, and fairly warm weather. We stopped often to
snack, except for the freshman from NJ. He didn't bring anything I didn't
specificly tell him to bring, including food, water, and a flashlight.

After many hours, we neared the top. Some people were tired, some were
energetic, but eveyone was excited by the reports from hikers on their way
down. "Dangerous winds," "It knocked me to my knees," and other ominous
warnings were showered upon us. The freshman from NJ who had never been above
treeline got a glazed look in his eyes and started drooling. We began
preparing for the last 100yds (the only part above treeine) as if we were
preparing for battle. The sound of zippers zippering could be heard for miles
around. In actuallity, the wind was very stong, but not what I expected from
what we had been told. I lost my balance once, going down on one knee.
However, the view was extraordinary. We could easily see Mt. Washington. In
the other direction, Cannon looked great.  We ignored the trail sign which
rudely informed us that our 4.5 hour hike had only covered 2.7 miles.

Some in the group wanted to continue to Mt. Lincoln, but since it was already
after 2pm, and some people in the group were exhausted, we headed back down
with pizza on our minds. Going down was great because of the deep snow. The
snowshoeing was fantastic. We even were able to glisade (slide on our butts)
down certain sections of packed trail. This, plus the views, made the hard
work all worth while (I hope).

O.K., so maybe it wasn't brief.
