Trip Report:	Harvard-MIT day hike at Mt. Monadnock
		--------------------------------------
Saturday, 18 March 2000

Team: Sophia Kossida (leader), Andreas Gathmann, Andrei Simakov, Katja
Riedel, Philip Johnson, Stephane Gallavardin, Erik Beach, Linda Sauter,
Paulina Varchavskaia

Details:
--------

What a great way to celebrate the coming of spring to Boston! Leave the damned
city and go for what turned out to be the best day hike we've done in years, at 
least for some of us :-). 
So what, that the plan was actually to get together at 8:30am and go hiking in
Franconia Notch? Having finally gathered 2 drivers and a van at around 9:30, we
set out to Monadnock instead - judged easier and more appropriate given the time 
wasted in the morning. What a fine judgement this turned out to be!

On the trail (we were told at the parking lot, where they will charge you $2.50
per person for your own efforts, that the White Dot trail was the least icy one)
at quater to noon, we checked the weather conditions on the top: 25F, wind 
10mph, visibility 105 miles. Well... that's my kind of winter hiking! As we set 
out on our way, layers were coming off flying in no time, and every now and 
then you could hear muttered words like "Better safe than sorry...dammit!" as
various trip members tried to justify to themselves putting on an extra layer
of long underwear in the morning. It must be said that not everyone listened
to our leader's wise words prior to the trip, and some people were actually
wearing... not just death fiber, but actually JEANS!!! OK, so the weather was
really nice, basically, that's what I'm trying to say.
 
We filled our bottles with the Monadnock spring water about 1/3 of the way up. The
trail was covered in snow, apart from the rocks, which were, in equal proportion,
dry, wet, and icy. We were at the summit at 1:30pm. The sun was shining, kids were playing among the
rocks (apparently, Monadnock is the second most climbed mountain in the world, after
Mt Fuji, or maybe Mont Blanc, we couldn't decide), we could see the ocean 
on both sides (all right, all right, we could just see the other mountains
and some small towns around). At about 2pm, three of us (Andrei, Sophia, and
myself) ran out of food and decided to start hiking down. The descent was fun,
apart from a couple of spectacular splits on the ice, and at least partly 
done sliding down on our bums in the snow, for those of us who weren't wearing
jeans of course.

We filled our bottles again on the way down, this time in order to sell the
amazingly tasty Monadnock spring water, fresh from the source, on the black market back
in Cambridge. You can get some by contacting any one of the names above. We
take all major credit cards, checks, cash, gold, blood, teeth, and year-round
passes to skiing resorts in New Hampshire. 

Sorry for making this so long, but I'm still really extatic about the trip. :-)
I hope Sophia organises even better ones in the future. 

Paulina 

Disclaimer: The above is obviously a joke. The Monadnock Spring water is not for
----------     sale - it's too good!

