The week became short and was only a long weekend, drat the rain. It was a 
weekend of follies, mistakes and mishaps.

It all stems from my stupidity. I kept making biting off more than I could 
chew, but I ahve lived to tell about it. It all started sat morning when I 
got to the uberfall and saw rhodendrum open. I ahve done this climb a ton 
of time, just not in the past five or so years. Eyeballing it from the 
ground, I had flash backs,  #10 stopper and a 2.5 friend, I think. I pulled 
them from my rack, and three draws, 2 for the anchors and one for the nut. 
My friends advised me to take more gear, I said "I know where the stuff 
goes, I think" as I took off with my light rack. Well I got to where I 
thought the nut went, but man I couldn't get it in. "What's up with that 
shit"  Finally I found the placement, and the rest went off without a 
problem. Mental note, take lots of gear.

The next of the mishaps is when I head over to the arrow area, it was a 
busy weekend and we figured we could get on something down there. The only 
thing open was Annie Oh, a nice 2 star 8+ PG, I now know why it was open. 
"You want the tricams for this one?" Someone asked, nah there not that 
useful as I headed off. Man was I wrong, horizontal after horizontal, small 
tcus in horizontals scare me. Run outs scare me. Mental note take lots of 
gear, stay off PG climbs.

The saga continues the next day with Maria. I had never been on it, and 
decided the direct start didn't look to bad.  That was another mistake. It 
is a butt hard bouldery committing bad feet no hands no gear piece of crap 
start to a great climb. I brought lots of gear for it though, couldn't get 
a damn thing in. There are just no placements. Basically you climb into 
this horizontal, there is an old pin you can back up, not that it will keep 
you off the ground if you fall, but hey, you can hang on it as you go "Shit 
this looks hard." From the horizontal you can see the jug, and you can see 
the small crimp you don't want to use, but you have to. I had to squish 
myself up smaller than I ever had before. After a little bit of winging and 
hanging, I got up and we finished the climb, fun moves up a long corner.

As if I hadn't gotten my ass kicked enough on that, I decided to move up a 
grade or two, and stick witht he scary stuff. I went over to coexistence, a 
beautiful face to roof type thing. I had obviously learned nothing over the 
past day, choosing a 10+ PG climb, I racked up to high heavens, another 
mistake, don't carry gear on climbs you can't place it. I haven't been so 
scared on a climb in a lot time. It starts off fun, hard moves off the 
ground, then some easy ground to a ledge, another hard move off the ledge 
and easy ground up to the roof. This is where it gets scary.

The roof is at the top of a corner, and an old rusty pin protects it two 
feet to the left of the corner. If you fall you slam into the corner.

Just relax the roof don't look so bad I tell myself. I clip the pin. Reach 
up to the roof left handed and bam a jug. Right hand up, small crimp, bump 
again and bam a jug. Ok this isn't bad I think to myself. Pull up on the 
right hand, toss the left heal up, rock over, mantle a little, move the 
right hand up to a crimp. Set the feet on the jugs, move the left hand into 
a 2 finger gaston arm fully extended.

Take a breath, realize what a mess I just got myself into and start babling 
about mommy. The situation, if you haven't figured it out, the pin, now 2 
feet below my feet, and two feet to the right. Not the type of fall I want 
to take. No gear anywhere I can see, no jugs within reach, not a good rest 
spot either, fully extended gastons are hard. My feet were on good holds, 
my right hand was solid, my left hand was flaming fast in that heinous gaston.

Relax breath, jug out right. I see the moves, flash back to SEARCHING FOR 
BOBBY FISHER, (a great movie if you haven't seen it) "it twelve moves away 
but it there", my belayer now know I am scared. I only talk about movies on 
stuff when I m likly to fall. I can see my belay stand up and move into the 
rock.

Left foot leaves the jug, crosses behind the right onto a smear. I start to 
weight it, it slips, "stay foot" and a stern look, and it stops moving. 
Breath, uncross, right foot smear, "stay foot", breath. Right hand to the 
side pull, now in an iron cross on two smears. Press hard with the feet, 
oppose on the right hand, move the left hand down to the crimp. Thank god I 
am out of the gaston. Breath. Suck in on the sidepull hard. bump the left 
up to the sloper, and again to the jug. feet out right to the big holds, 
gear and easy moves to the chains.

A easy rap down, a few belays and I was fried for the weekend. No more 
leading for me until I learn from my mistakes.

--Dan Shub
