From: "Abbot, Richard" <abbot@ll.mit.edu>
To: "'MITOC paddle'" <paddle@mit.edu>
Subject: Muscongus Bay TR, 7/22-7/23
Date: Mon, 24 Jul 2000 12:28:12 -0400

	As expected, this was a Maine classic.  Trip included
	Laurence, Gunther/Dorothy, and Alicia, who all proved
	to be strong and good paddlers and great company.

	Muscongus Bay is between Casco and Penobscot Bays on 
	the Maine coast.  It is shallow and full of lobsters and 
	consequently is a sea of colorful lobster trap buoys.  Who 
	knows how many lobsters saw us from below, some of the dumber 
	ones from their wood and metal traps :)  Due to so many lobster 
	buoys, there is little boat traffic there except for the lobster
	boats and some sailboats coming into Friendship
	and surrounding areas.  There is also very little buildup
	along the shore and locals are quite friendly.  The bay
	has a southwest exposure so winds can pick up in mid
	afternoon in the summer from that direction.  There
	are also lots of small islands in the Bay and the
	Maine Island Trail Association (MITA) has negotiated and maintains 
	camping sites on about 10 of them.  MITA requires membership
	in order to be able to use these camp sites.  I think the one
	we camped on (see below) was the best.  The water temperature
	was from 60 to 65 degrees F, swimmable for some.

	This trip offered a variety of paddling conditions from
	pea soup fog, to totally clear and with small friendly
	swells to total calm to windy chop.

	Our access to Muscongus Bay was from Round Pond, on
	the peninsula to the Pemaquid Point Light and near Bristol.
	It took about 3.5 hours of driving from Cambridge.  Gunther
	was the immediate attraction/local-color at Round Pond,
	as you can imagine on coastal and wooden boat-appreciative Maine, 
	when he brought out his folding Klepper and proceeded to assemble
	a full sized double kayak made of wood/canvas/rubber in 15
	minutes.  Boat ramp use was $2 per and there was plenty of overnight
	parking.

	Our first leg was about 2 km over to Louds Island.  It
	was foggy so visibility just allowed us to see the island which
	we paddled to and then along towards its outer tip where Bar Island
	is located and was my first candidate for camping.  We noted
	about 8 sea kayaks on Bar and so proceeded on to Little
	Marsh which is just around the tip of Louds a bit.  
	Fog was definitely pea soup and we followed the
	shore of Louds and looking for Little Marsh which we finally
	saw as a ghost island.  Gunther had his Garmin GPS and me
	charts/compass so we could have found it otherwise.  Gunther had
	downloaded coastal Maine on his Garmin and we could see on
	the screen our location wrt the islands, our course, distance,
	and speed.

	Little Marsh (or Three Tree Island as we called it) had no
	beach but we found some rocky shoots for landing.  The island area
	is about 100 by 200 meters at high tide.  It had room for one tent
	and we found a large flat rock and another small clearing
	for two more tents.  Not much on the island but lots of
	island roses and of course the three pine trees huddled together
	at the summit of the island (5 m above sea level).

	After setting up camp, we went out paddling over towards Ross
	Island and Haddock Island, the first about 2 km away.  With
	GPS in Gunther's hands (and with my chart/compass as backup) we hit
	Ross island right on the mark in fog with about 30 m visibility.
	We paddled back in complete fog, surfing on some nice swells.
	The fog finally cleared just in time for sunset and we got
	to see how close all surrounding land really was.

	Nothing to disturb our sleep, just waves crashing on
	shore and the brightness of the stars and milky way.  And
	the moon came up spectacularly over the ocean later.

	Next morning was splendidly clear and after our
	island breakfast we set out on calm waters with a minor
	swell and some patches of wind.  The day was spent with
	paddling and landing on beaches for swimming/breaks.  
	We paddled to Wreck Island, then to Harbor Island, and over
	to Thief (which has a great white sand pocket beach at low
	tide) and finally to the inner tip of Louds which had
	our first good sandy beach and warm swimming.  The final
	short stretch back to Round Pond was a windy choppy run, but 
	fun/exhilarating.

	Dinner of corn/lobster/clams was available at an outside
	diner at the boat ramp for $12 but we opted for a nice
	outdoor pub back in Portsmouth NH on the river.  This was 
	a great trip, I'm sure I'll be repeating next summer.

	Rick
	MITOC Sea Kayak Chair

