From: "Abbot, Richard" <abbot@ll.mit.edu>
To: "'MITOC paddle'" <paddle@mit.edu>
Subject: Woods Hole - Marthas Vineyard - Cuttyhunk - Trip Synopsis
Date: Tue, 8 Aug 2000 11:36:42 -0400 

	This is just a synopsis of our trip last weekend. 
	Anybody interested in more detail can e-mail me 
	since I'll more completely document the entire trip 
	for future reference.  Unfortunately, we expected
	rougher conditions then we got and didn't film
	much.

	This was an ambitious trip announcement and it 
	turned out that just Gunther and Dorothy (both strong
	and skilled paddlers) in their double Klepper
	accompanied me.  I decided to use the stable
	Dagger Apostle (which is a great expedition
	boat), although it lacks a rudder which meant
	a lot of corrective paddling was required since
	there was initially a NW wind that shifted to SW.

	The trip covered about 40 miles in two days,
	without proper study of the tidal stream it
	would have been a desperation paddle to cover
	that distance against the tidal stream as 
	opposed to going with it.  We had GPS to measure
	time, distance, and, most important, velocity to
	find the maximum tidal stream velocity.

	We started at Woods Hole public dock (with some delay trying
	to find a place to park).  No delay was planned
	as key in our use of the tidal stream, but we lost
	just about .5 hour with the parking (finally paying
	a motel manager $20 to use their lot).  We crossed 
	Vineyard Sound rather uneventfully to a cove on 
	Marthas Vineyard about 4 miles away.  With an average 
	speed of about 6 miles per hour we did it in about 
	an hour (faster than those taking the ferry :).  
	We did find some eddies (circulating water) near the 
	shore there.  After a short swim in warm water
	we crossed back, heading for a point on the
	Elizabethan islands (a 17 mile long chain separating
	Buzzards Bay from Vineyard Sound, mostly private and
	inhabited mostly by sheep and reminiscent of Scottish 
	highlands).  We got over just as the tidal stream was turning 
	against us, so we paddled a bit and took a long 
	landing at a public sand beach on Nashuon Island 
	(lots of ticks).  When the tide favored us, we 
	continued our way along the beautiful Elizabethans 
	with some classic paddling conditions (we did find 
	some nasty water at the Robinson Hole between the 
	Nashuon and Pasque islands in the chain).

	Our goal was to Cuttyhunk and Pemikese islands at the
	caboose of the chain which are public and where
	we figured we could camp, but with sore shoulders 
	and backs we sought out a beach and found a pebble/sand 
	one on Nashawena where we eventually camped.  This 
	is private land, but we were low profile and stayed just
	on the beach near tide line.  I called this Lobster trap 
	wreck beach since there was so much debris washed ashore.
	No ticks and, thanks to some nesting birds, no mosquitoes
	so I got to sleep outside and enjoy a great sky and
	my second view of the Milky Way and stars to the horizon
	this summer.

	The next glorious morning we took off in rough surf
	and paddled to Cuttyhunk Island at the end of the
	Elizabethans.  There is a small community of summer
	homes and the harbor and island are wonderful (there is
	a daily ferry from New Bedford called the Cuttyhunk Line).  
	Historically, this was the first English colony for 
	3 weeks before Plymouth and Jamestown.  There is a bed/
	breakfast there.

	We spent the afternoon paddling back to Woods Hole, 
	cruising at 6 miles per hour with the tidal stream ebbing.  
	We did run through one good tidal rip (the roughest 
	we encountered) at the hole between Pasque and Nashawena 
	islands, four foot chop as my kayak was up, balanced on 
	the wave top, and smacking down.  Fortunately this was 
	short.  We avoided another major rip at the Robinson hole 
	between Pasque and Nashuon islands - Gunther
	was game in his quite stable Klepper but I used my favorite
	expression "I may be dumb but I'm not stupid" and we both 
	went around in quieter water.  The passage back through the 
	hole at Woods Hole can be intense at maximum tidal stream
	but we hit it at slack again and it was uneventful.

	Strong paddling and endurance required and ability to
	handle the tidal rips and eddies.  The Eldridge Tide and Pilot
	Book really made this trip possible (thanks Tim) since
	it gave valuable tidal stream information.  Again, this 
	trip is just recommended for strong/experienced paddlers who 
	properly do their homework for planning around the tidal stream.

	Happy paddling,
	Rick
	MITOC Sea Kayak chair

