From paulina@ai.mit.edu Fri Mar 30 16:21:50 2001
Date: Sun, 25 Mar 2001 18:14:51 -0500
From: Paulina Varchavskaia <paulina@ai.mit.edu>
To: climbers@mit.edu
Cc: Susan_Ruff@hmco.com
Subject: The one-pitch epic. (Trip report)

This one is a long one, so here's the substance:

Susan Ruff and I went to Lake Willoghby on Saturday. There was A LOT OF
SNOW there. So much so, that most of the day was spent on the approach,
and we got to climb one ~50-meter pitch of ice before rapping off and
descending. It was snowing again as we came down, so good luck if you're
going there soon! 

Paulina

    [ Part 2: "Attached Text" ]

The one-pitch epic (Trip Report),
or Susan and Paulina think they're doing Willoghby...

So, it all starts at 5am on Saturday, March 24th, as I get out of the
house to jump into Susan's car with my daypack, gear, and thermos. I
had had almost no sleep the previous night, coming home around
midnight, packing, reading and being way too exciting about the
prospect of my first multi-pitch ice experience to come. The alarm
rang when I was already (still?) fully awake, contemplating the issue
of daylight saving time. Did the clocks go back (forward?) an hour,
while I was pretending to be asleep, and I don't know that? Will I
miss Susan? 

But there she is, pulling over, and I'm relieved. Just to make this
trip report longer, bear with me, I shall recount to you the saga that
is the pre-history of this fine adventure. Susan and I have been
planning to go ice-climbing for at least a month, but something always
got in the way. Schedule differences, club gear checked-out, and
whatnot. Now, finally, we're doing it, and I'm happily telling Susan
of my daylight saving time worries. "Oh, she says. I was actually here
one hour ago". Happens. Susan had inadvertedly rewound her clock while
setting the alarm time. When she came all the way to my house, and
noone was there, she realized the mistake, and went back home to catch
some last minutes of sleep. The trip hadn't even started... 

But all seems well now, and we set out, and I doze off quickly to
compensate for the sleepless night. Four hours later, we're glimpsing
the ice-falls of Lake Willoghby from the car, and as we drive to the
parking lot, it becomes apparent that nobody has ploughed it since the
last snow fall. One car stands there, however, so we get out, take a
snowshoe each and shovel out a parking spot for our car. As Susan
parks, I walk up to the trail to see if we'll need snowshoes for the
approach. Yes, we will. On they go, so do the packs, and Susan starts
out, using a trekking pole for balance. I don't have such luxuries, so
out comes an ice-axe. Naturally, it is no use, as I bury it completely
under the snow each time I try to lean on it. Susan makes a stop, and
now I go first breaking trail. What fun! At least a foot of new snow
fell in the previous couple of days. The snow is knee-deep with
snowshoes on. It is too deep for the spikes to be useful, and so we
slip and slide all over the place, as we try to get up to the
climbs. Many times I have to cut steps with my snowshoes before any
progress is possible. Half-way through the hike, Susan comes up with
an ingenious way of walking
with one snowshoe on, leaning on the other one for balance, and now
she is breaking trail.  Now, the approach had been described to me as a
15-minute steep hike. By the time we get to the base of the Tablots,
we have spent more than 2 hours on the approach! 

It is noon, time for lunch. On the way, we met a couple coming down
already, after a morning's outing, as well as a pair of
French-Canadian climbers who called to us from far away: "Are you two
girls?". "Strong woman, I like it" said one of them, as we drew
closer, and I thought that it would be good to use my ice-axe on him,
for balance, of course, as I fell through to waist-level
again. Instead, I made polite conversation in French, and went on. 

At least the weather seemed nice at the
bottom. Now we look on as the winds pick up, driving clouds at scary
speeds across the cliff. Snow is blown off from the ice falls, and so
Susan decides to look for a more sheltered climb to lead. We have some
food and hot drinks from our thermoses (um...), and go back down
across the snowfield that looks like prime avalanche terrain, and
around a corner, and across another snowfield, where there are by this
time of day, three other parties already on the ice or preparing to
lead. The area is indeed more sheltered, so we go back for our
backpacks. By the time we return, sort out our gear, and anchor me
(the belayer) to a nearby tree, it is 2:30pm. We haven't climbed yet. 

Finally, Susan starts leading on double ropes what looks like a
two-pitch class 3 climb. It's starting to snow. 
In many places, she has to stop to shovel the snow off the ice
with her hands and the adze, then she disappears from view over a
large bulge, and I am left in the company of my down jacket (really
useful in the wind despite relatively warm weather). Another couple of
climbers rappel off a tree right above us, and stand around for a
while chatting about the snow. Then they start down the small
avalanche debris, trying to glissade, until the woman screams and
stops. For some time it looks like she's injured, but she finally gets
up and walks down again. Susan is still invisible behind the ice, I
pay out the rope. "Susan! Thirty feet! Feet...3...0", no
reply. "Feet...1...5, Susan!". "Come again?", I hear faintly. So I
tell her how much rope there is left of her 60m doubles, and she is
setting up a belay anchor. Her first screws-only belay anchor, as it
turns out later. The wind has blown all the snow-clouds away, so now
all the screws are in direct sunlight. Susan puts snow patches around
them to prevent the ice from melting. I'm an impatient belayer, and
keep calling out. "That's me on red!" Susan doesn't bother with
replies anymore, but I think she heard me. Finally, I hear "off
belay". I quickly take her off, take off my down jacket, put on the
shell mitts, pick up the axes. It seems like an eternity passes before
she puts me on belay, to my toes anyway. It is nearing 4pm as I take
down my tree anchor and start climbing. Screws come out easily, thank
God, from the soft ice, but there's still sooooo much snow on the
climb. As I get over the large bulge and see Susan, she tells me if we
don't stop now we'll be rapping in the dark. I of course have a
headlamp... in my pack down there. I'm an optimist after all. So I
complacently follow my leader's orders, as she tells me to traverse
right to the nearest tree and anchor myself. After I'm safe, she comes
down, taking down the anchor, and traversing to the trees. The sun is
setting while we tie the ropes together around three young trees (the
best thing there) and I rap down first untangling the ropes as I
go. Then comes Susan, pulls the ropes. It's getting dark, we pack,
coil the ropes and start going down. 

Have you ever tried glissading down avalanche debris? Not recommended:
the snow sticks to you, so it's more effort than walking, and it's
really rough on your butt. Mind you, if you try walking down, you'll
fall through to your waist every second step, so it's your call, which
one you prefer. We tried both, with equally poor success rate. We
descended in complete darkness to the car that needed some more
shoveling before it would agree to get out. It was snowing heavily. 
Dinner at a nearby pizza
place and Sgt.Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band rekindled our spirits,
though, as we drove back to Boston. 

And thus ended our single-pitch epic. We had fun. Seriously. 
Never underestimate the power of a snowfall!



