Subject: TR: Full Moon Hike
Date: Sun, 05 Aug 2001 22:30:51 -0400
From: Robert Zeithammer <rzeitham@mit.edu>

Trip report: Full Moon Hike to Adams

Participants: Adam Smith, Carmen Carreras, Zoltan Maliga, Pei-Lin Hsiung,
Elron Yellin, Alexis Weber, Mike Whitson, Christian Holtze, Tara Chauhan,
Tim Chklovski, Robert Zeithammer

A lone car, wipers on maximum speed, is flying down a narrow backroad
towards the mountains on a hot rainy summer night, too fast for the lousy
visibility caused by puffs of steam rising from the pavement. The mood
inside is at a freezing point, falling with every explosion of light in the
cloud-filled sky, sagging every time a particularly strong shower
accompanied by irregular thunder plays a stormy drumbeat on the roof. It is
almost midnight; Alexis, Mike and I are trying to stay awake after a long
hot sun-drenched day of intense hiking and climbing. We are rushing to meet
other intrepid MITOC hikers in Jefferson Notch for a full-moon night-hike
into the heart of the Presidential Range, but nobody really believes we are
going to even catch a glimpse of the moon tonight. Maybe nobody else will
actually show up, and we can quickly return to Camelot cabin for that long
restful sleep we so badly need. But no such luck, Elron and Christian are
already there, napping in their car. We quickly fall asleep ourselves
trying to eek out at least half an hour of sleep. As I am drifting away, I
can feel the cold raindrops steadily dripping on me from the breathing
crack in the window...

"That looks like a MITOC car. And look, there are people sleeping in
there!", a familiar voice disturbs our light uncomfortable sleep. They made
it in full force - two carloads of people. I wonder why are they so cheerful
and lively. And then it hits me: no raindrops! So I stumble out of the car,
look up, and there it is, shining even through the dense pine trees - a huge
bright Moon smack in the middle of a completely clear sky, a giant cold
lightbulb seemingly hanging just above our heads, a miracle as far as I am
concerned. Suddenly, all fatigue is forgotten, meticulously pre-packed
packs laden with food and clothing seem light on our shoulders, and by
0:45, we are hiking single file up the classic Caps Ridge Trail. Walking
though the woods after a summer storm is like stumbling into a shop where
all forests buy their perfumes. The freshness of the scented mountain air
is balsamic after a whole day of inhaling the near-liquid hot humid thing
they call "air" in the valleys. We soon break out of the forest onto the
first Cap - one of the many rocky outcrops decorating the otherwise
uneventful ridge. The view is magnificent and the whole world seems to be
completely still. No wind, no motion anywhere, just silhouettes of
mountains as far as the eye can see, a few lonely yellow lights in a
distant valley deep below us, and a crisp moon overhead completely
overpowering even the brightest stars. One would want to just sit down,
admire the scenery, and join all the stillness, but our preliminary goal,
Mount Jefferson (2.5 miles and 2700 feet from the car) is still looming
high above us. So, with headlamps mostly off, we scramble up the steep
cliffy Caps one after another. Who knows where the trail is, we are just
following the most direct and esthetic line up the ridge. The only drawback
of the recent downpour, that so nicely cleared the air, is that it turned
the lichen on every rock into a perfect lubricant apparently optimized for
Vibram soles. "Ouch" seem to be a popular word in the crowd...

3:30 AM, we regroup on the summit of Mount Jefferson. While everyone in the
group is hiking at a terrific pace, the strongest hiker among us is
definitely Elron even though he arrived to the summit last. At every step,
he is conquering not only the mountain but also the pain in his ankle - out
of the cast for only a few weeks after 3 long months that it took for a bad
fracture to heal. That's what I call a fast-track rehab!

We do not dwell long on Jefferson, and as soon as we start feeling chilly,
we set out for Mount Adams that, dark and menacing, looks much further in
reality than on the map. Adams, the second highest peak in the Whites, is
the goal of our little expedition. An hour or so behind my optimistic
schedule (nobody is really surprised), we have to hurry to see the sunrise
there at around 5:30. As we step from the summit towards the unpleasantly
deep Edmands Col, it becomes dark, navigation without a headlamp is
suddenly difficult. What happened? We are now in the moon-shadow of
Jefferson, realizing that we got completely used to the moonlit
above-treeline world and some of us even stowed our headlamps away. On they
go again, and the rush to Adams may begin...

As they turn around, those first to the Col get to witness an IMAX-worthy
scene: a chain of bobbing insignificantly small lights slowly moving down a
pitch-black face of a mountain. Just by watching, one can feel the
difficulty of the trail as the lights move jerkily around, up and down,
left and right, trying to find the easiest footing on the slippery talus
slope. Above the summit, a huge silver Moon forms a backlight for thin
ribbons of white clouds moving at incredible speed, twisted into surreal
shapes by the air flowing over the high Presidential Ridge. The overall
theater is mesmerizing. For some reason, it is not really windy where we
are. At 55 Fahrenheit, the conditions are perfect for fast hiking in shorts
and t-shirts, we don't feel cold at all. With the Eastern sky already lit
up, it is time for an all-out sprint to the summit of Adams. In the end,
five of us make it there on time with others soon to follow.

The sunrise is fantastic, more interesting than the classic kitschy stuff
we have all seen before. At first, the eastern horizon looks cloudy and
misty. Suspense is on as we wonder whether the clouds will actually block
our view. As the clouds turn into bright streaks of yellow and red, our
"Oooh!"s and "Aaah!"s go off. We think that might be it, but then, a red
disc the size of at least half the sky floats gently upward. After spending
at least half a mile of film on this wonder, we turn to the next order of
business - our long-awaited potluck breakfast. Well, it is actually mainly a
blueberry pancake breakfast due to lack of explicit pre-trip
variety-enforcement (much like Harvard Square T-stop seems to be the
dominant place to meet in Cambridge, blueberry pancakes apparently top the
list of things to eat for breakfast). But some hash browns, sausages,
cookies, and a huge pineapple break the monotony. With three Dragonfly
stoves, we had quite an operation going. We considered raising funds for
MITOC by establishing an impromptu concession stand for exhausted hikers,
but we ate all the food before anybody showed up. And that's when the
fatigue set in...

A random bypasser would probably be thoroughly baffled by eleven motionless
human bodies perched improbably on large boulders strewn about the summit
of Mount Adams, often contorted to fit the shape of these thoroughly
uncomfortable rocks. For those of us who just couldn't bear the discomfort
of one particular rock and set out drowsily to look for another bed, the
sight was quite eerie - like an aftermath of some freakish mass suicide.

The sole exception to the mass sleeping hysteria was Christian, determined
to bag the deceptively "nearby" Mount Madison as well. "That was much
further that I thought!" he exclaimed exhausted upon his return. His
activity and energy slowly woke us up, and realizing that we had already
soaked in all the beauty we could, we lazily got on our way back at 10 AM
having spent almost five hours on the summit.

And we walked back, and we were sleepy, and the rest of the trip became
just another hike, just another descent to a parking lot deep in the woods
bellow, just another beautiful summer day in the mountains. Sleep
deprivation made the whole experience a little hazy and broken up with
numerous mini-naps whenever possible. But the chance we had to see and
navigate the amazing moonlit landscape on the Presidential Ridge was
definitely worth it. Keep an eye out for photos documenting our little
adventure further.

Robert Zeithammer
