From mcintire@mediaone.net Mon Dec 10 19:31:48 2001
Date: Sun, 9 Dec 2001 18:21:24 -0500
From: Tom McIntire <mcintire@mediaone.net>
To: YAC <Y-Alpine-Club@yahoogroups.com>, mvp ski <mvp-ski@yahoogroups.com>
Subject: First Tracks on South Pack Monadnock...

    [ The following text is in the "iso-8859-1" character set. ]
    [ Your display is set for the "US-ASCII" character set.  ]
    [ Some characters may be displayed incorrectly. ]

A little trip report, and a bit of philosophy for all who read.
 
I got up this fine morning to about 6 inches of snow in the yard here at
the house in Manchester. A glorious Sunday morning. I had thought about
heading off to either the Packs or to a local ski area to earn some
turns. I figured this would be an excellent way to spend the day, or at
least part of it. I called a friend who had asked me to "kick his butt
into skiing this winter", but he had other things he needed to do today,
so it was just me.
 
I threw the Camelback, skis, etc., in the truck and headed west on 101.
It was early, and the roads were still less than perfect in spots, but
that just added to the beauty of the morning. About an hour later, I
pulled into the parking lot at Miller State Park. It looked like no one
had headed up the auto road since snow flew. Looked like I had the place
to myself. I took a leisurely pace at gearing up, and then headed up the
hill, skins on the skis. Once I got into the woods a bit, I was
surrounded by the beauty of the fresh-fallen snow, the first snow of the
winter in these parts. I knew it was going to be a beautiful day. I took
a very relaxed pace, reminding myself to soak in the beauty of the day
around me. The trees were still laden with snow, and it was an absolute
fantasy world around me. I noticed in spots the cover was as little as
two inches deep, other places as much as six. Oh well, enjoy what mother
nature has provided, and don't look the gift horse of fresh snow in the
mouth.
 
In spots there were tracks from assorted animals in the snow as well. A
couple of deer had crossed the path, as well as rabbits, squirrels, etc.
The key was to take the time to notice. Birds were singing in the trees,
reveling in the silence of a fresh show. I slowly continued up the hill,
soaking it all in. In spots, I had scenic overlooks out to the southeast,
and I was able to look down on a world with a fresh coat of white,
including Temple Mountain just to the south of South Pack.
 
With time, I made it to the summit, and sat down to take a break on one
of the picnic tables. I quickly realized that the wind was blowing pretty
good, and I needed to throw on an extra layer. I pulled my windbreaker,
hat, etc., out and bundled up. On the summit, the clouds were restricting
the view to just a few hundred feet. It was gray, and kind of cold. It
had it's own beauty, but not the same as what lay below.
 
So, after having a little snack and a bit of water, I peeled the climbing
skins off the skis and headed back down the hill. I quickly "learned"
that you do not try a deep, sharp telemark turn on pavement covered in
just three inches of snow. As I edged the ski, it cut straight down to
the pavement, and I found myself on the ground smelling something akin to
burned-out breaks that have just been worked a bit too hard. Oh well, I
got up, and adjusted to the conditions, and down the hill I went, making
gentle and gradual turns as I went.
 
A few times I had to stop and uncake the snow from the bottom of my skis.
The problem was that the ground was warm, and I picked up water on my
skis. Such is life. It was worth the effort to scrape the skis repeatedly
to enjoy the day. I was able to enjoy my first turns of the season, made
even sweeter by the fact that I had earned them, as opposed to riding a
ski lift. As I reached the bottom, I saw a few tracks in the snow where
some kids (at least kids at heart) had carried a sled up and sledded down
the hill. I am sure they enjoyed themselves as well.
 
Upon reaching the parking lot, there was a Jeep which had just arrived
with two hikers. They too were in search of the solace of the mountains.
 
So, my question is this. In today's world of peak bagging, etc., was I
really there if no one saw me, and I took no pictures? Did I really claim
the first tracks of the season on South Pack Monadnock? My answer is
certainly, as I gained a bit of peace in my soul today, a bit of peace
which I have sought for a while now. It was a beautiful day, and I
enjoyed it greatly. The snow was lousy, sticky, and heavy, no getting
around that. Just the same, it was well worth the effort, as days when
you can get outside and enjoy your time on a mountain are few and far
between.
 
Lessons learned, and reminded...
 
Snow sticks to the bottom of skis when the thermometer is hanging around
freezing, especially when the cover is thin, and the ground is warm. Take
the time to scrape it off when you need to, relish the fact that you need
to, as it keeps many people at home instead of outside, which makes the
experience you have that much more special and unique.
 
Take time to listen to the sound of snow crunching under your skis. It is
a special sound, one that you will hear nowhere else, and one you never
will hear the same way twice, and rarely on groomed trails. How the snow
crunches can tell you a lot about the snowpack.
 
Remember where the thin spots were on the way up so you don't do
something stupid on them on the way down. Thin cover happens, and if you
go up and down the same way, you have the chance to know where it is
going to try to get you.
 
Use the good gear.  A fabulous pair of skis is no good if they sit in the
gear room while you suffer on an old pair of junk skis. Use the gear you
normally use, and enjoy it. Yes, it will wear out quicker, but it doesn't
matter in the greater scheme of things, as it is the quality of time
outside that really matters in the end.
 
Get outside and enjoy life! My friend who couldn't go today spent the day
doing work instead. It is a pity. He claims that he "has to", but he has
"had to" for longer than I can remember now. Always "having to work" on
the weekend negates the purpose of working. You work so you can afford to
do the things that make you happy. If you work to the exclusion of doing
stuff that makes you happy, what is the point of life?
 
Enjoy the snow however it is right for you. For me, telemark gear is the
way to go. Of course, there are the classic jokes like Randonee is French
for "can't telemark", but in the end, whatever gets you up and down the
hill is good, be it a snowboard, alpine gear, tele gear, randonee, etc.
Heck, even a sled is good as long as you can control it on the way down
the hill.
 
Disclaimer:
Skiing in the backcountry is inherently dangerous, especially if done
alone. You must be willing to assume the risks associated with doing such
activities. That said, I can't think of a better way for me to have spent
my day than skiing the hills...
 
Hope to see all of you on the snow sometime soon!
 
-Tom
Tom McIntire
mcintire@mediaone.net
May All Your Water be White!!!

