Participants: 
 Yoko Miyata (repeat from previous weekend)
 Dave Comi (repeat from previous weekend)
 Sayan Mitra
 Amy Fair
 Hector Briceno
Date: Friday 1/18- Sunday 1/20/2002

Now the leader's boring details of what happened, although I think
Amy's tripreport sums it up pretty well.

Trip title: the extremes: 

      techniques on well-rested light-weight winter hiking
                      by Hector Briceno

We departed Boston at 3:30pm on Friday.  The unknown or the forgotten
detail was that it was a long weekend.  I have left Boston before on
regular weekends by 3:30pm to beat traffic, but did not count on this
detail which voids the warranty on my idea.  Ok after spending hours
on traffic we finally reach our first stop: BJs at Tilton (out of the
traffic range of the BJs at exit 36)

There we buy enough food to last a couple of days in the wilderness,
never mind that we are only going to spend less than 48 hours.  One of
my ideas for this trip was to try new "technologies" and go for a
really comfortable outing (although we did not carry a tent?, can you
explain that?).  Anyways we bought 3lbs of animal crackers, 5 lbs of
pancake mix, 6 lbs of syrup, 5+ lbs of meat, and red
wine for the meat.  We proceeded to eat dinner at KFCs which worked
out well.

The plan was to go ice climbing from 7pm to 11pm or midnight.  Well we
get started climbing until 11:30pm.  Needless to say, we were already
behind schedule.  The ice climbing was fun, we setup two ropes.  It
was Sayan's and Amy's first time ice climbing.  They had a good time.
Amy showed her skills by first dropping an ice axe on the open part of
the stream (1 foot underwater).  But if that was not enough, she
decided to toss her mittens since they were an ice block.  Guess where
they landed? Sure this time she did not aim for the wide open spot of
the stream below her, but instead to the side; well the mitten landed
on a 1 foot wide hole in the snow that lead to the stream!!!.
Fortunately for her, in 30 seconds in went under the snow and appeared
next to the ice axe.

As always people headlamps ran out juice (but we had plenty of
spares).  Everybody got to experience the joy of ice climbing, and
around 3 or so, we proceeded to the next objectives...

We drove out and stopped by the Irving Gas Station in Lincoln (NOTE:
this is one of the only open 24hr places around, they have decent
munchies and good bakery).  We got the to Lincoln Woods trailhead at
sometime after 4.

We proceeded to the packing.  I did mention that this was an
experimental trip right?  My plan was to have trip participants go
light only carrying clothes, sleeping bag and trail mix.  I would try
out my new expedition sled by carrying stoves, food, and most of the
group gear.  I also wanted to try out the laptop in the wilderness
idea.  I wanted to carry a 80-100lbs of gear to check out how it felt.
Ok so I starting stuffing the duffle bag: big tarp, coleman double
burner stove, 2 propane cartridges, Primus Gas Lantern, 2 isobutane
canisters, 1 dragon fly expedition stove, 2 32oz bottles of white gas,
2 pots, 2 frying pans (for the meat), different cooking utensils like
spatula, whisker, spoon, 3 lbs of animal cracks, pretzels, very
important doritos, 5 lbs of pancake mix, 6 lbs of syrup, cheese,
pepperoni, 5lbs of steak, 2 lbs of pasta and other food.  Then my
personal gear, sleeping bag, snow shoes, bivy sack, 2 pants, 1 fleece,
1 synthetic jacket.  And lastly the electronics: laptop, set of
speakers, car inverter, 30lb car battery, extra cables, 1 motorola
talk about, cell phone, charger.  I of course being careful about
details, brought my home weight scale.  I tried to lift the duffle bag
to no avail.  So I had Amy and Dave lift the duffle, I would quickly
walk onto the scale, they would give it to me and I would support it
on my knees.  The total weight for the sled was 140lbs and then there
is the 20lbs light day pack.  Oh well so much for just wanting to
carry 80-100lbs.  Things add up.  But no problem (that is what my
friend Goran would say).

In one minute after everyone is ready to go, I quickly gloss over the
cross country skiing technique.  "You guys went to Stan talk on xc
skiing, now do what he said."  Ok I actually told them a bit more (30
seconds more) than that "Kick, glide, Kick and glide that is all there
is too it."  I reved my engine and we were on our way.  The original
plan called for skiing to the bondcliff trail junction on the
wilderness trail, about 5 miles of xc skiing.  So we started.  Skiing
in the dark is always pretty nice, even though the moon was not full,
it provided light, and even shadows.  Everyone was having a good
time.  I was working as sweeper, since my speed was not great.  The
concept of pulling a sled does not mean there is no friction to
overcome.  It strikes now (after the fact) that I could have waxed the
bottom of the sled.  Anyways after about 1:40 we reached the
franconia fall bridge, not too bad for people's first time xc skiing
at night and with packs.  This is where I camped 2 years ago in the
Katahdin prep trip.  I crossed the bridge and started up the little
steep inclined that is right after it; others were adjusting their
skiis and waiting while I went ahead.  Well after I crossed the
bridge, that short little incline proved to be very difficult for me.
I could get no traction, and being a true skier, I refused to take off
my skies and pull the sled up.  After about 19 minutes of fighting I
managed, really.  I went 50 yds and then realized that the real
wilderness trail starts here.  You see up to this point the trail is a
super highway, now it becomes like a rural state road.  I said to
myself, hmm it is 7am, there is no point in carrying on, plus this
puppy ain't gonna make it.  I tell them about the new plan to camp
around here, they are pleased with the idea.  

We setup camp at the same place I did 2 years ago.  Take the huge tarp
out, and setup the bags.  To make things exciting we were not bringing
a tent, it takes time to setup, it weights 8 lbs, and that is the new
Robert/Hector trend anyways to go tentless.  We are tired and get to
bed at 7:30am.  The "next day's plan" (ie in few hours) is to xc ski
to bondcliff trail, hike up to west bond and come back.  I being super
generous tell them that we will sleep 2.5 hours and get up at 10am.  I
can see that the feel my generosity (NOT).  The "night" is pretty
uneventful for me.  For Amy is a different story, she learned the
meaning of cold.  not that bad, but since it was her first time winter
camping, she thinks that is feeling cold.  

We end up getting out of bed by 10:47am, it takes a while to get out
of bed when you are not in a tent.  Oh did I mention that we only made
3 luke-warm water bottles.  One always gets lazy when one is tired.
Oh well no major, it only means people sleep a little colder.  We get
out of bed, have a cold breakfast, ie bars, and snacks and doritos.
They doritos were very good, I should get paid as an endorser,
anyways...I offer my generous snowmobiling services and take the sled
with snowshoes.  Big difference carrying 20 lbs vs 140 lbs.  We must
have reached the bondcliff trailhead around 12:45.  We cached the
skis, the sled and the 3 lbs of animal crackers under the snow, it
looked like we buried someone; put on the snow shoes and off we go.  I
tell them that we are screwed since the trail is unbroken, I think
very few of them realized what this meant in terms of speed.  This was
also the first time or second time snow shoeing for some people.  I
like doing multiple skill beginner trips!!!

After 1 hours of hiking we are starting to feel the effects of sleep
deprivation and lack of food, but I kept comforting them by the steak
that will await us when we get back.  Every once in a while snow shoes
would come off, but this always happens.  It happens to me too.  The
funniest thing I found was when Yoko realized that she had lost a
snowshoe.  I mean like how do you not tell that you are missing a
snowshoe? how in the hell do you lose a snowshoe?  to make it more
interesting this happen on a 45 degree slope that we are traversing,
not a nice place to be walking around.  We proceed to look around for
it, probing with our poles.  After 4 minutes of searching Yoko finds
it below 1 foot of snow.  Odd.  We continue hiking.  After 30 minutes
Amy, gives me the latest Amynews, "Hector, just to let you know, in 45
minutes my body will shut down."  I am like "Ah? what do you mean by
shutdown."  I can't remember her answer.

After more hiking, I was expecting to reach Bondcliff but nothing.
Cell reception nothing either.  It is now 3:30, we been hiking for
some time.  We continue, but I internally set the turn around time to
4:00pm; it is not looking good.  Dave is breaking the trail pretty
well, but I still do not understand why we are not getting there.  On
Topo USA the bondcliff trail takes 3.8 miles to get to Bondcliff; the
White Mountain Guide Book says 4.4 miles!!, and to make this funnier,
I thought it was more like 2.5-3 miles to get to the top.  At around
4:10 I start getting some cell reception, so I make few calls, my
sister is not home.  I look at the altimeter we are at 400 feet, still
265 feet to the top if my last calibration (weeks ago) is not too far
off (unlikely).  At 4:30, I tell Dave that if we don't see anything in
the next minute we are turning back, and so we did.  I wanted to teach
them that it is ok to turn back.  We must have been less than 0.5
miles from the top, but since this was the first winter experience for
many of them, I want them to be around for more trips :).  We snowshoe
ski down, and get down pretty quick.  The xc is mostly uneventful
except for the weird explosive sounds.  I think to myself, it would
suck to bump into vandals or people with guns.  In a minute the clouds
light from behind; it was fireworks.  Why, I have no clue. 

We get to camp and that is when the comfort begins.  I take out the
Coleman Dual Burner Stove, hookup a propane cartridge and get a small
flame.  You see people say that propane does not work in the winter.
And they are almost right.  That is, it does not work if it is cold,
but once you put in a pan with water, and pour warm water over it
every once in a while it works.  That is why I also took out the
dragonfly stove to get some boiling water for the propane (it is a
bootstrapping process).  NOTE: (LESSON #1) dont take a propane stove
in the wildnerness without a way to warm up the propane.  Oh another
cool thing (LESSON #2) I learned is the stove starter.  I have one of
those that it is a stick with a child-proof trigger (it took me a
while to figure it out).  I was able to light the dragonfly stove with
it.  The big advantage is that you can use it with gloves!!.  We start
the dinner appetizers with some steak tips sauteed with red wine.
These work very well because the cook fast.  

With some free time in my hands I can start the electronics component
of the trip.  I take out the car battery from the duffle bag, and duct
tape some wires to it and to the DC/AC inverter.  Voila, the laptop
and speakers are powered.  I start the timer to keep track how long it
lasts.  It lasted more than 4 hours, and still had plenty of juice to
start my awesome-powered SUV Ford Escort wagon.  LESSON#3 Lead acid
car batteries work in the winter (15 degF). 

We then proceed to the main dish which is composed of
Broncosaurus-size steaks and pasta.  Food came in pretty well
considering how little we had eaten in the past n hours.  

After the participants quickly dispatched the food, they did not
linger around, in few shorts minutes, I found myself being the only
person not in their sleeping bag, perhaps Dave was still up.  Sleep
came in quickly.

Day 2 (or is it 3) would a mellower day considering the previous day's
effort.  We would take full advantage of the supplies brought and
feast ourselves to a good hearty pancake breakfast.  The syrup proved
how liquids become very viscous at low temperatures, it had the
viscosity of heavy grade petroleum.  After such endevour we proceeded
for the touristic activities of the day.  The day's activities called
for a sojourn to Franconia Falls, and then another foray into Black
Pond.  We quickly took camp down and left our gear ready to go while
we left for some window shopping.  The Franconia Falls trail is a nice
little short trail that takes you to a section of the Franconia Falls
that have a lot of little falls (suprisingly).  When we got there Dave
exploration skills itched in and he decided to explore the stream.
Normally you would expect me to say something like he fell in or
something, but nothing happened except that I was probably worried for
him for about 1.57 seconds.  I reminded him that the waiver he signed
did not covered him :).  We returned to the main trail and continued
to the Black Pond trail.  We bumped into a couple coming from this
trail, telling us that is a bit more back country than the other
trails but that it should be fine.  This trail runs for 1 mile into
the Black Pond.  The cool thing is that it is a bit more back country
than the other trails; it has steeper ups and downs (nothing major),
cooler and sharper turns.  We all fell at least once coming in.  At
one point Dave and I went a steep downhill followed by and uphill
barely unscathed.  We started wagering how many people would fall and
who would not.  The running bet was that the probability of falling
was 0.5.  Although the person who said this was really meaning that
the probability of ONE person to fall was 0.5 (all other would fall
for sure).  He was proven wrong by the fact that only one person
fell.  Anyways it was fun going up and down, taking sharp turns, doing
more real back country skiing than skiing on old logging roads.

At Black Pond we encountered the smell of a campfire (completely
illegal).  Some Russians were cooking sausages (the smell was good).
The pond unfortunately was not skiable (at least under our waiver), it
was very slushy so we just had to sit there and enjoy the views which
where very nice.  

The return trip and return to the cars was very uneventful except for
those times when I was dragging the huge sled behind me with the music
from Rocky playing out of the duffle bag from the sled.  I mean this
is as close to the movie as it gets, dragging at 160lb sled through
the snow, on skis, with such high adrenalin music.  

The last funny thing, which I overlooked, was hooking the battery back
to the car.  I was not really sure which end was positive and which
end was negative.  I will admit I connected them wrong for short
seconds, but nothing happened.  Then the moment of truth came, would
the battery have enough juice left to start the car after playing 4
hours of music on the laptop and speakers.  Like my friend Goran would
say: No problem, dude.
