Trip Report:  Leonids 11-19-2002

Participants:  Deb Fraser and Dave Scott
               -- yeah everyone else bailed -- ya sissies! jk ;)

Since the forecast for the Whites was calling for 40-50 MPH winds, we
opted to watch the Leonid meteor shower in the Monadnock region in NH
instead, where the forecast called for minimal wind dying down
overnight and mostly clear skies.  We set out for North Pack Monadnock
Mountain, a little after midnight.  As we headed into the countryside
in NH, we noticed increasing amounts of snow cover on the ground.  We
turned off route 101 in Peterborough to make our way along some back
roads to the North Pack trailhead.  Although the roads were plowed,
they were narrow and there were patches of hard frozen snow forcing us
to travel slowly, especially with a sports coupe.  While we drove, we
happened to see a couple meteors shoot across the sky.  Now, having
been to the mountain, a few years back, I had a good idea of where we
wanted to go, however it was not as easy as anticipated to navigate
the back roads in the dark, with a limited memory, map, and
directions.  To add to the challenge, the streets seemed to morph from
one to the next.  Several times we started down one road that was
named with a street sign, and when we reached the other end, without
taking any turns, the road was labeled with street sign of a different
name.  So we ended up passing the trailhead, driving back and forth,
thoroughly mapping out the area in our heads (we know it real well
now!), and verifying the guidebook directions which described a route
coming from the opposite direction.  Traveling at about 20 MPH, it
took us roughly an hour to find the trailhead after we left the main
road.

It was roughly 2:30 am.  We packed up our gear, and set out on the
trail, hiking by headlamp.  It was cold (predicted temperatures in the
20s F), but a nice calm night.  The ground was covered with a few
inches of packed icy snow.  Our surroundings were very pretty, with
frozen snow on the pine trees, and a layer of ice coating the tree
branches, and even the dead leaves hanging from them, which looked
like glass ornaments as they clanked into each other.  The trail was
easy to follow with blazes and some snowshoe tracks to guide us.  Dave
also noticed what looked to be fox tracks or some similar animal.  We
hiked for roughly a half hour until we came to rock slab clearing with
a good open view of the sky to the east, where we set up our bivy
camp.  As predicted, it was mostly clear with a few transparent high
altitude clouds passing.  However, it was very bright out for the
middle of night.  The moon, which was now hovering at the treeline of
the furry pines that stood behind us to the west, shone down on us
like a giant flashlight in the sky.  There was also some light pollution
on the horizon coming from the Nashua, Amherst, Milford area
city/towns to the east.

Nestled in our sleeping bags, at around 4 am, we watched the sky.
Going on little sleep from the days before, even with the cold air on
my face, I had a hard time staying awake, and could relate to how
Hector must have felt on our trip last year.  The sky gradually began
to darken as the moon lowered to the west, and the stars became
brighter.  Still with the combined light pollution from the moon,
city/towns on the horizon, and eventually the rising sun, it just
wasn't nearly dark enough to see more than the brightest meteors.  But
they were still nice, and I was glad we had made the trip.  Some had
bright blaze tails with a bit of color, green, orange, gold.  There
were a couple bright flashes of ones that hit the atmosphere dead on.
There were faint ones too, and you could only wonder for every one
that we saw how many hundreds or thousands were shooting by that we
couldn't see.  Around the peak time, after 5 am, I saw a few bursts of
like 5 or so per minute.  Sometime after 5:30, I sat up to see the
pretty orange light of the rising sun coming over the horizon.  The
winter wonderland of the snowy trees around us was becoming more
visible and beautiful.  Wish I had brought the camera.  Dave saw the
space shuttle on the horizon near dawn, but I missed it, as I started
to doze off just before 6 am.

I was completely out for about 1.5 hours.  At 7:30, we got up, packed
up camp and headed back down, admiring the wintry scenery along the
way.  Dave noticed some more tracks which he thought might be from a
bobcat or some other feline.  When we reached the car, we met a nice
older gentleman, who had just arrived to go hunting after getting off
the night shift.  He, a shotgun hunter, and Dave, who hunts with bow
and arrow, talked shop for a while.  These are conscientious hunters
mind you, only hunting for the challenge of obtaining food for
themselves and connecting in their own way with nature.  I gathered
from the conversation, that the both of them only set out to bag one
animal in a given year, if lucky, which provides enough food to last
quite awhile.  Dave says he still has deer meat from one he got two
years ago.  And we talked about viewing the meteor shower, which the
hunter had seen at his work place.  As he headed into the woods, we
made our way back onto the road in search of breakfast.

Overall, last year's show was much more spectacular because it was
much darker out and you could see many more meteors.  I had seen
between 20-30 per minute during the peak that year.  But we saw
some good ones this time too, and had a nice little adventure. 

Deb

