Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA17852; Mon, 12 Jan 98 01:30:38 EST
Received: from NW12-326-SUN3.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA03586; Mon, 12 Jan 98 01:23:36 EST
Received: by NW12-326-SUN3.MIT.EDU (SMI-8.6/4.7) id BAA25970; Mon, 12 Jan 1998 01:23:35 -0500
Message-Id: <199801120623.BAA25970@NW12-326-SUN3.MIT.EDU>
Subject: Trip Report, Middlesex Fells orienteering and bushwhack, 1/11
Date: Mon, 12 Jan 1998 01:23:35 EST
From: James C Reardon <nemesis@MIT.EDU>

Personnel:  Richard Barbalace, Po-Hsiu Cheng, Jesse Darley, Bill Finger, 
  Carolyn Flesner, Effie Kitsou, Olga Kitsou, Jim Reardon, Christine Tovee

11 January was a warm clear day that would not have been out of place
in early October.  Jesse and I spend the nicest part of it running
around Middlesex Fells depositing bags of candy and dried fruit near
obvious landmarks.  By the time the trip assembled in the Student Center,
night had fallen and a nearly-full moon, the brighest of the year, had
appeared.  It took 20 minutes to get to the Bellevue Pond parking area
of the Middlesex Fells.

There was haze in the air, but Orion and Cassiopeia were clearly visible.
I began expounding upon the art of navigation by the stars, then realized I
couldn't find Polaris.   Oops.  This led to Lesson #1:

 Lesson #1.  Don't depend on the Big Dipper to locate North.

     If you're going to get lost at night, is it going to be after 
     dusk,  or before dawn?  After dusk, in all likelihood--the most
     likely scenario is you're hiking somewhere, you get lost, and
     darkness falls on you.  In the winter, the Big Dipper (Ursa Major)
     will be at its lowest elevation in the hours after dusk, meaning
     it's at its most difficult to see (if you are surronded by trees,
     or there is haze in the air), and can't easily be used to find Polaris.
     Therefore, if you think you might be getting lost sometime in the 
     winter, you should learn how to locate North using Orion or Cassiopeia.
         
We split into three groups, each with an orienteering task.  I went with
Olga and Effie.  Olga took the map, Effie took the bearings, and
we soon arrived at our destination.  Nothing of particular interest 
could be seen.  This led to Lesson #2:

  Lesson #2.  Expensive compasses (which have mirrors) produce better
              bearings than cheap compasses (which don't).

       Jesse and I had taken (and verified) the original bearing with
       an inexpensive compass without a mirror.  It turned out to be
       off by 12 degrees from the bearing taken by the expensive compass
       Effie was using.  The most likely explanation is that Effie's
       reading was correct and ours was wrong.  The mirror allows the
       compass to be held at eye level, so that the object upon which the
       bearing is being taken may be seen at the same time as the compass
       needle.   

Olga then moved 10 meters away from the spot we had landed on, and began
walking in a circle around us.  She soon found the bag of candy.

Meanwhile, Carolyn, Po, and Jesse had found the Panther Cave, though not
the Panther, and navigated swiftly to the nearby candy bag.   Bill, Christine,
and Richard, having been assigned the most difficult task, had no trouble
following the compass bearings once they had found their starting location,
a "kid's fort" near Quarry Spring.  They did not expect a "kid's fort" to
be mostly underwater [1].  Richard noticed that mag-lites are actually
magnetic and can distort compass readings.

The groups rendezvoused at the Sheepfold, a large grassy area suitable
for picnics or perhaps emergency landings of small planes, and exchanged 
stories before heading off on a bushwhack.   This time of year ground clutter
is at a minimum, and with no snow it's feasible to move off-trail.  
We headed more or less west to arrive at a lookout over the completely
ice-covered Middle Winchester Reservoir, where we tried a simple, one-
bearing triangulation, locating ourselves by taking a single bearing from
a known point, and finding the intersection of that bearing with the 
shore of the Reservoir.  

It was then 10:30 pm, and time to head home. 

Jim Reardon



[1]  Jesse and I were both raised by intelligent beavers.  Sometimes we
     forget to make allowances for other people.










