Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA00545; Mon, 12 Jan 98 10:22:16 EST
Received: from PSYCHE.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA27544; Mon, 12 Jan 98 10:17:23 EST
Received: from starr.mit.edu (STARR.MIT.EDU [18.88.0.157])
	by psyche.mit.edu (8.8.7/8.8.7/psyche.server.mc 1.9 97/06/12 19:06:56) with ESMTP id KAA14266;
	Mon, 12 Jan 1998 10:17:20 -0500 (EST)
From: Meg Muckenhoupt <meg@psyche.mit.edu>
Received: (from meg@localhost)
	by starr.mit.edu (8.8.7/8.8.7/psyche.client.sunos.mc 1.4 96/11/13 18:16:06) id KAA12416;
	Mon, 12 Jan 1998 10:17:19 -0500 (EST)
Message-Id: <199801121517.KAA12416@starr.mit.edu>
Subject: Trip report: Logan airport
Date: Mon, 12 Jan 98 10:17:18 EST
Cc: meg@psyche.mit.edu (Meg Muckenhoupt), stuart@ll.mit.edu (scott)
X-Mailer: ELM [version 2.3 PL0]


On Saturday morning, I and my trip co-leader Scott Stuart made a
traditional prompt MITOC start by arriving at Logan Airport at 10 a.m.
sharp.  The day was clear and warm - far too warm for the layers of
synthetic materials we had donned in anticipation of bitter winds on
the open runways.  Making our way up the stairs to the exposed station
entrance, we were quite warm, and ever so slightly anxious.  Would we
attain our objective?  Would we have any hope of finding the
appropriate bus?  And what of the owls?

At the bus platform, we found ourselves surrounded by cheerful
prosperous-looking white people wearing summer cloth boots and polar
fleece.  I counted six spotting scopes before I decided to stop
counting, and binoculars abounded.  Within minutes, chartered Massport
bus drove up, and a representative from the Boston Natural Areas Fund
invited us on.  We were off!

We drove in circles (a sly architectural reference to holding
patterns?) for fifteen minutes or so, before we made our way to the
north cargo area.  (From this point onwards, you should interrupt your
reading every 90 seconds to say WHOOOSH! very loudly.)  The BNAF rep
pointed out the remains of Wood Island Park - now Wood Island Salt
Marsh.  The poor park was designed by Frederick Law Olmstead, who is
best known for creating New York's Central Park and large portions of
Boston's Emerald Necklace. AT one time, East Bostonians frolicked
amidst artificial drumlins and dipped their toes into the Atlantic
here.  Now, one runway later, the place is a duck's delight.  Here we
met Norman Smith, the director of the Blue Hills trailside museum, who
is otherwise known as "Mr. Raptor."

Mr. Smith is a happy man.  He has followed snowy owls to Barrow,
Alaska.  He has photographed snowy owls sitting on top of the
artificial owls that Logan posts on towers to frighten extremely dumb
birds ( you know - the sort that don't notice that the "owl" never
moves).  He has even photographed snowy owls eating other snowy owls.
On Saturday, his mission was to show us a snowy owl at the airport.
The owls love the mown grass and runways, where Boston rats are easy
to catch.  The Airlines hate the owls, because they are afraid they'll
get sucked into jet engines. But the local Brant geese, snow buntings,
buffleheads, sparrows, and all other birds hate the owls
because owls eat them, & thus avoid the runways when the owls are
about.  

However, Logan airport does not rely on owls alone for bird control.
Our first stop was by Wood Island Marsh, where we observed many birds
and a very large propane cannon, used to frighten the birds into
getting their hearing tested, which can take several weeks, what with
all the appointments being full for months ahead of time.  Back on the
buss, the driver radioed for clearance to drive around the runways.
We inched along Logan's rocky shore, glimpsing tiny moving speckson
the water that could have been birds - or rocks.  The plane-spotters
had a far easier time.

Finally, the bus halted, and we saw it; one sleepy-looking snowy owl,
tucked in next to an old rowboat washed up by the tides.  These owls
stay awake most of the time, probably to avoid being eaten by other
snowy owls.  With the help of other peoples' expensive equipment,
Scott and I stared at the neckless, fluffy thing as it yawned, rotated
its head, ruffled its feathers and stamped its feet.  Although they
are the largest raptors overall, they aren't terribly heavy (ca. 2
kilos), and this owl's round head and body made it look... cute.  A
cute little cannibal. Strawberry Shortcannibal and her pet Binky the
owl, who defends her mistress with razor-sharp talons.

Ahem.  As time passed, Norman Smith ran out of things to say about the
owl, and we all trudged back onto the bus.  But before we could leave
the runway, Norman spotted another raptor - a gyrfalcon perched on yet
another airport tower.  These birds are the rarest raptors in North
America & Norman became quite excited.  This bird entertained us by
swooping down from the tower to take a puddle bath, and flying
directly over the bus before returning to its tower.  Scott admired
the thing's talons, which were quite long.   

Three hours after our start, we returned to the Logan airport station,
long after our usual lunch.  In desperation, we tore open our Nalgene
bottle and guzzled cocoa.  It was still hot!



meg muckenhoupt

