Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA05224; Mon, 2 Feb 98 12:10:03 EST
Received: from CARDIOID.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA11118; Mon, 2 Feb 98 12:08:43 EST
Received: by cardioid.MIT.EDU (940816.SGI.8.6.9/4.7) id MAA06642; Mon, 2 Feb 1998 12:08:31 -0500
Message-Id: <199802021708.MAA06642@cardioid.MIT.EDU>
Subject: The Imp, Monadnock, and the beat goes on ...
Date: Mon, 02 Feb 1998 12:08:31 EST
From: Richard B MacDonald <rbmacd@MIT.EDU>


Birch trees, laden with ice, bend into a graceful arch under their  
load, draping branches strung with glinting, glassy droplets that  
tinkle and clack like a beaded door at the Sonny Bono Gate to  
heaven.  Or that was my impression anyway, and I had plenty of  
opportunity to let the image settle in as I trudged and crawled and  
bushwhacked through the trail clutter on the way up the Imp Trail  
on Saturday. 
 
Bill Finger chose the perfect day, and arranged for perfect weather  
with blue skies and air cold enough to keep us dry but warm  
enough that we couldn't see our breath.  He selected an ideal little  
hike on which to hone our newly purchased winter skills.   Matt  
Sweetland, Rick MacDonald and Jen Kiest filled Bill's truck with  
packs and snowshoes, ice axes and crampons for a leisurely afternoon  
walk in the woods.   
 
The Imp Trail starts off NH 16 east of Mt Washington 5m south of 
Gorham. The path to the cliff over the Imp profile teases with 
panoramic views of the neighboring mountains leading to a Kodak 
moment Mt Washington at the top.  Parking at the trailhead requires 
a sticker,  but if you haven't got one, the Forest Service will leave 
instructions and a bill on your windshield.  The trail is a loop, but 
we went up and back in the interest of time, starting at about noon 
from the north entrance and arriving at the top by three.  The trip 
down took less than two hours.   The crampons that we wore on the 
trail up and showshoes down were not necessary, but were plenty fun. 
 
Bill, preparing for winter trip-leading to come, brought along  
extra clothes and food for everyone, a camp stove, four sleeping  
bags, a tent, a laptop computer, Hoyle's Complete Guide to  
Euchre, and an inflatable ice-fishing hut (just in case).  Matt,  
unable to leave materials science back at the lab, spent several  
tense moments (for me, but apparently not for him) determining  
the Young's modulus of ice bridges on the brook.  Jen (what do  
they teach those kids at Wellesly?) kept us entertained with 
dirty jokes and wordplay. 
 
The weekend was ideal for me in that it helped to underscore  
several of the lessons of winter school.  For example, changing out  
of your sweaty clothes is a necessity, not a recommendation   
(Murray Hamlet Admonition #1), as I learned while shivering in  
the parking lot of a Wendy's in my cotton-the-death-fibre  
underwear two hours into the drive home.  I also learned that no  
matter how much you tease your trip leader on the way up the  
mountain, he'll forgive you if you give him a cup of warm sweet  
coffee (plenty of cream and sugar: Murray Hamlet Tip #23) at the  
top of the mountain, even if it's not a real mountain (Murray  
Hamlet Fact #47).  And I learned that those "butt expensive"  
(Cathy Lavelle's clothing lecture) outdoor boutiques sometimes do  
have decent deals (Sorel-like boots from EMS --- last year's  
model: $14.98! (no kidding)).   
 
On Sunday, when I forgot my new boots and walked up Mt  
Monadnock in tennis shoes, I was at least comforted by my  
garbage bags and duct tape ("Don't leave home without them."  
Robert Nagle of Eco-Internet, fastest team on the planet).  Becka  
Roolf and I took the long walk up along the ridge, which features  
a nice stretch without trees from which you can see a beautiful  
vista of NH mountains.   The ice and crisp-topped snow along the  
ledgy parts did require snowshoes with grippy crampons.   
 
Especially fun were the little bits of cinder that I started to notice  
in footprints and impressions on the way up.  On the way down, I  
stooped to see that the little cinder bits were moving ("There are  
insects that live in the snow" Jim Reardon).  These were  
snowfleas, or more properly springtails (Achorutes nivicola), little  
black nits less than a millimeter long and so numerous that some  
of our up-the-hill footprints were completely black on the walk  
back.  Apparently these poor little critters are designed as  
Nature's Monte Carlo method for locating surface minima: their  
little ejector-seat tails can spring them along the snow, but can't  
release them once they've landed in a divot.  Briefly, I pondered  
next year's wintertime foraging recipe swap and lecture: shoeshoe 
hare with hemlock tea and springtail flan...  Maybe not.  
Next time, though, I will remember not to leave my Power Bar 
in an outside pocket (Jim Reardon Lecture: How to make ice). 

