Received: from PACIFIC-CARRIER-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA18605; Sun, 12 Apr 98 12:51:44 EDT
Received: from mail-out-0.tiac.net by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA16588; Sun, 12 Apr 98 12:52:00 EDT
Received: from mail-out-2.tiac.net (mail-out-2.tiac.net [199.0.65.13])
	by mail-out-0.tiac.net (8.8.8/8.8.8) with ESMTP id MAA20905;
	Sun, 12 Apr 1998 12:51:04 -0400 (EDT)
	(envelope-from wraith@sunspot.tiac.net)
Received: from sunspot.tiac.net (hourglas.tiac.net [199.3.132.22])
	by mail-out-2.tiac.net (8.8.7/8.8.7) with ESMTP id MAA03563;
	Sun, 12 Apr 1998 12:53:09 -0400 (EDT)
	(envelope-from wraith@sunspot.tiac.net)
Message-Id: <3530F114.6DB741A7@sunspot.tiac.net>
Date: Sun, 12 Apr 1998 12:51:32 -0400
From: Ryan Smith <wraith@sunspot.tiac.net>
X-Mailer: Mozilla 4.03 [en] (Win95; I)
Mime-Version: 1.0
To: spelunkers@MIT.EDU, spelunk@MIT.EDU
Subject: trip report
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=us-ascii
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Well, here's the trip report I promised some people.  Some of the
pictures I took turned out really well.  I know a couple of other
people took pictures too - maybe we could arrange a short meeting
where we could trade extra pictures, or take orders for duplicates.
Write me if you're interested...

  --Ryan



The MIT Caving Club's Second Annual Spring Break Trip

We started out this trip by renting a van - this is the first time in
recent memory that the club has had to rent a vehicle, so naturally we
learned a few things.  First of all, don't get a new van.  The van we
ended up with was a brand new Ford Windstar.  Only 400 miles, very
nice and clean on the inside.  Second of all, seven people and their
equipment in a minivan is kinda tight.  Six is about all you really
want.  If you have more people, or want to be able to sleep well, get a 
bigger van.

Some of us (Christine, Joel, Alex, Matt, Ben) met at the club office
at 5:30 while the rest of us (Ryan, Danny, Darrel) went to go pick up
the
van.  It took longer to get the van than anticipated due to the long
line, and we weren't all at the caving club office until just before
8.  We finished sorting the equipment, and then were on the road by 9.

You might wonder why we were using two large cars with only 8 people.
Well, Alex and his station wagon were continuing on to Florida from
West Virginia.

Anyway, once the van was rented, we loaded it and Alex's station wagon
up, and we were off.  We used CB's to communicate between the cars on
the way down, and this worked pretty well, except the range was short,
and we eventually got separated far enough that we lost contact.  The
drive down was fairly uneventful, except that the van group missed a
turn, which actually turned out to be a good thing because the
physically longer route had less hills and winding roads.

The van group got in around 11am on Sat, and the station wagon group
about 45 minutes after that.  We then unloaded and proceeded to nap.
After a couple hours of napping we woke up and stumbled around for a
while.  We decided that we didn't really want to go to our scheduled
cave cause we'd have to drive another hour to get there and we no
longer felt like it.  So instead of going to Bowden, we went to
Sharps, which we'd done last year, and was just down the road.  We
geared 
up and got to the cave somewhere around 3:30pm.  We'd made reservations
for
a 9pm dinner, so we knew we couldn't stay too long in the cave.  

This was the club's second time in Sharps recently - we also visited it
last year at this time.  Christine and Ryan were the only people who
had been on last year's trip though.

We had a bit of trouble remembering where the cave was, because we
didn't bring directions for it, but we found it eventually with the
help of two local kids who were wandering around.  The rusty red car
was still there.  Once inside, we encountered a salamander taking a
stroll.  We turned left at the salamander and proceeded into the first
big room.  Crossing the first big room, we entered the second room,
and avoided the Entrance Maze.  Then we continued to the main trunk
passage - Halloween Hall, where the register was.  We signed the
register and looked for last year's entry, but the register didn't go
back that far.

At that point we turned left and dropped down a level into the Central
Maze portion of the lower level.  We spent some time playing around in
watery crawls there, but we didn't find too much that was exciting.
We then wandered around the lower level looking for Sharp's Waterfall.
We did find a 6 foot waterfall with a pretty good output, but looking
at the map now, I think that was the "small waterfall" in the Central
Maze.  The tunnel just across from the waterfall had another smaller
waterfall behind a passage that looked like it was filled with rain.

After we tired of this area, we returned to the upper level and
proceeded down the main trunk again to Jib Junction.  A little past
that, we encountered the mud men.  It seems like their population had
soared since last year.  It now included such things as pigs, smoking
faces, demons, phallic symbols, bats, and many other things I can't
remember.  I couldn't remember what we added last year, but I didn't
seen anything that looked familiar.

At this point we turned around because we wanted to be back in time
for our dinner reservation.  We made it out in good time and with no
problems.  We got back in time to clean up and even take a quick hot
tub dip before dinner.

Sharps doesn't have much in the way of formations.  On one side of the
trunk passage at one point there are some soda straws and small areas
of flowstone, but nothing spectacular.  The size of the main passage
is pretty impressive through, at times more than 100 feet wide, and
ranging up to 35 feet tall in the section we visited.  The floor is
mostly 
jumbled breakdown, but is occasionally smooth packed mud.

The next day we split up - Christine and Joel went hiking, while the
rest of us ventured to the Bone/Norman cave system about an hour away.
The plan was to start in Bone and try to find the connection to
Norman.  Bone Norman has about 16 miles of passage, but the entrances
are only physically 4 miles apart.  Bone is also very dry, while
Norman is very wet, so we thought we'd have a chance.  

Our directions to both locations were kind of spotty, so we spend a
while
looking around trying to find Bone.  Along the way, we ran into
"Buckshot",
a very very large dog that had a hilarious way of running.  He played
with 
us a bit, as we looked for the cave, which was all very fun until we saw 
him nibble on a decomposed animal.  From then on, we wouldn't let him
slobber
on us.  

We found three entrances to Bone.  One was high up in a cliff, so we
couldn't
get to it.  The first one we tried led to a very dusty and fairly large
passage
that didn't go very far, perhaps 400 feet.  It looked like what I would
imagine
a sandstone cave to look like, very smooth walls, and a floor of reddish
dust.

The next one we tried was a much smaller opening.  In fact, the entire
cave
was much smaller.  It went back about 200 feet to a small room, and from
there
to a long series of belly crawls interspersed with the occasional bit of
normal
crawling or walking.  At a couple of points we were given the option to
crawl left 
along what looked like the regular passage, or down and to the right to
a smaller
but otherwise similar passage.  We always chose the left or straight
ahead route, along which we frequently encountered small pieces of
flagging tape.  Eventually though, this led to a pinch the group was not
comfortable with, so we turned back.  There was 
passage visible beyond, with what looked like two wet stalactites, so
this may have been the connection.  If we'd had a shovel we could have
dug out the floor a bit and continued.
However, one of the pictures on the net has a shot of what the
connection looks like from
both sides, and this was not it.  In fact, I have since found out that
the connection
was in the first cave, and difficult to find if you don't know where to
look.
Along the way there were some nice formations - some small
columns, many soda straws and stalactites.  The entire cave was overrun
with cave crickets, varying from black with white spots to almost
completely white ones.  
There were also an abundance of spiders, and a couple bats.
We had entered these caves around 2pm and exited around 5pm.

Disappointed, but dirty and happy, we exited Bone and drove to the
approximate location of the Norman entrance.  Alex had gotten a bit sick
from something he'd eaten the previous
night, so he decided he'd had enough for the day and would wait in the
car while we
explored Norman.  Now we were told that the entrance was a certain
distance southwest of a certain town.  However, what was marked as the
town on my county map turned out to be just an intersection.  No town at
all, not even a marker.  The distances in my directions were also not
very helpful.  We eventually got some help from a passing truck who told
us where the cavers usually park, and after a couple of false leads we
eventually found it.  We entered the cave around 6:30pm.

The entrance of the cave was a large room, floored with breakdown that
sloped down fairly steeply.  About halfway into this room there was a
large thick flowstone column (about 20 feet high and more than a foot
across) and a large stalagmite right next to it.  Seeing such amazing
formations, undamaged in the entrance of the cave, was absolutely
stunning.  I only wish that more caves were in such a pristene
condition.  At the bottom of this room, we heard a great volume of
rushing water, and after looking a bit we found a way down into a good
sized stream.  After a short bit though, the noise became even louder,
and the stream plunged over a 30 foot waterfall.  Due to the
construction of the passage, it was possible to look at the waterfall
from three spots:  climbing out on a ledge directly above it, climbing
around and down slightly to see the front of it, and climbing down all
the way and looking at it from the bottom.  This was also quite a sight.

At the base of the waterfall, the stream joined another one travelled
down a large, fairly standard, stream passage.  Although Danny had
discovered another large room above us, we decided to follow the stream
for now, and come back to the room on the way out.  We followed the
stream passage for quite a ways.  At some points it was ankle deep, and
at some points up to the bottom of our sternums.  It had rained
recently, so according to our information, the stream was probably close
to its high level.  In a couple of spots, the ceiling was pretty low
compared to the water level, about 2 feet, so this passage could flood,
although I didn't note any debris on the ceiling or upper walls.  We did
notice some foam a bit higher than the water level in places though. 
Along the passage we encountered the "Weight Watchers Turnstyle" and a
couple of large (8 feet tall and 40 feet long) mounds of flowstone
extending into the stream passage.  A large section had a thin layer of
water running quickly over it, which formed some neat patterns and
reflections.
Also along the stream passage, we saw several minor formations,
including some small pure white stalactites, and several normal small
stalactites, stalagmites, and sodastraws.  

After possibly 1/2 mile down the stream passage, we saw what looked like
an interesting spot, so we got out.  The room we exited in turned out to
be in a fairly old section of the cave.  In many places, the breakdown
in the room was covered in a layer of flowstone.  Also in this room were
some larger white stalactites.  In one corner was a small flowstone pool
which contained what could possibly have been cave pearls.  The bottom
of the pool was covered with semitransparent crystals, that looked like
one of those complex mathematical shapes.  Going around the side of this
room, we encountered another stream.  Since we didn't want to get mixed
up (ha!) we decided to take a route that led upward.  
Along this upward route, we found a sodastraw forest.  Along the side of
the forest, there were hundreds of pieces of sodastraw that had been
broken off.  Interestingly, the broken soda straws were covered with a
layer of flowstone, and had become a permanent part of the floor.  Right
near this area, there was a large vertical crack in the ceiling.  If you
laid on your back so you could look up this crack, you could see several
helictites (like stalactites except they stick out horizontally from the
wall, and are usually very twisty and delicate, and are also much
rarer).  They were small, about 3-5 inches long, and most were pure
white.  Hopefully the pictures will turn out.

Now we were presented with a couple of possibilities.  We decided to go 
upward again and emerged in a long corridor of old rimstone dams.  These
dams were pretty unusual (at least to us).  They were about 5-8 feet
across, and 3-4 feet high.  All of them were very solidly constructed,
having very thick edges at the top, and then walls that sloped inward,
forming a space roughly like an inverted pyramid.  Most of them held
only a bit of water at the bottom.  After climbing over these we
encountered a similar one that was incredibly slick, almost as if it had
been polished.  At the end of this passage, there was a massive
flowstone blockage.  At the top of this blockage, we could see that the
passage continued with these large rimstone dams, but the space above
the dams was only a couple inches, so we turned back.

Returning to the decision point we had been at earlier, we did a bit of
scouting.  Around the corner, and across a pool, we found some amazing
formations, so we headed that way.  On the other size of the pool was an
amazing curving drapery, about 10 feet tall, and 10-12 inches wide. 
Right next to it was another large column.  Just on the other side of
those was a spectacular set of flowstone, stalactities, and draperies. 
Some of these
draperies terminated in a strip of cave bacon.  We took many pictures
here - hopefully some of them will come out well.  With such scenery, we
decided to take a break and eat a snack.  

After the snack, we explored this room a bit, decided that there was no
more of such magnitude nearby, so we headed back.  The passageway did
continue though.  Returning to the decision point, we headed down,
around the other stream and down again, turned, and ended up at the
beginning of the rimstone dams (huh????).  After puzzling it out a bit,
we figured out that the stream had done a sharp turn just after we got
out of it, and the second stream was really the same stream as the
first.  Reorienting ourselves and making sure we were pointed in the
right direction, we started back along the stream.   

Eventually we got back to the waterfall area, and ascended.  Walking
downstream was easy, but fighting the current on the way back was
tiring.  We decided we'd explore the second room for a short while and
then head out.  The room turned out to be quite amazing, more like a
very large trunk passage (about 50 feet across, 30-60 feet tall).  We
followed it 
for about 15 minutes, after which it began to diminish in size.  Along
the way, we spotted several large (more than 2 feet) stalactites and
stalagmites (including multilayered ones with top layers larger than the
bottom ones), and one skinny, but very tall, column.  
When the passage shrunk rapidly due to some breakdown, we spotted some
large white formations up a slope, so we climbed up there and looked at
them.  We poked around 
a bit before we decided we'd turn back on this note, as it was getting
late (past 10).

We went back out of the passage, to the first stream passage (which
cleaned us off nicely), out into the entrance room, and then up and out
of the cave.  We were all tired from our full day of caving, but were
very excited at having seen such an interesting cave with such
spectacular formations.  I would guess that we're all excited to come
back again and do a more through exploration of this cave, and see what
other wonders it has hidden away.
