Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA09086; Mon, 20 Apr 98 19:41:43 EDT
Received: from MIT.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA08604; Mon, 20 Apr 98 19:41:32 EDT
Received: from MASSBAY.MIT.EDU by MIT.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA10822; Mon, 20 Apr 98 19:41:20 EDT
Message-Id: <2.2.32.19980420234207.0105c74c@po7.mit.edu>
X-Sender: sfitzger@po7.mit.edu
X-Mailer: Windows Eudora Pro Version 2.2 (32)
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Date: Mon, 20 Apr 1998 19:42:07 -0400
From: Scott FitzGerald <sfitzger@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Spring Circus Trip Report - IOCA conference NH
Cc: aaa@hopper.unh.edu

Hello everyone! Here's another rambling trip report from someone who really
does have better things to do (like my thesis!)....

But before I start I have a couple of public service announcements (I'd put
them at the end, but apparently nobody ever gets that far!)

Nick, can you please return my CB to the MITOC office during Tuesday OH.
Darrly, can you please return my flashlight at that same time. 
Just tape a note saying they are mine and leave them on the safe.

And now the trip report:

Pat Brown took the lead on this trip and did an admirable job of organizing
the drivers, equipment and food! This man is incredible.

Most of the group set off for NH around 6:30 on Friday night. All except for
Otto and Helen who upon hearing that traffic was bad (which it wasn't)
decided to wait a while and get a quick beer. Otto then impressed everyone
with his urban driving skills by hopping the curb at the boathouse and darn
near getting stuck in the gutter. We all had a good laugh, and wondered if
that beer was really such a good idea.

We all made it up to Bear Brook State Park where we were met with a fun
group of women from UNH (who did a fabulous job of organizing the whole
conference BTW) who were amazed that I could get so much crap onto the roof
of my truck... (see our webpages for what they were talking about)

We then moved our gear into the field which was base camp and everybody
spread out into the woods. The UNH folks had started a campfire for everyone
but we seemed to gather more people around the lantern lit while setting up
camp. Around 11 some of the other groups started arriving from RPI and
Northestern. We then migrated to the campfire when a rousing rendition of
Puff the Magic Dragon ensued! Many thanks go to Mike for bringing his guitar
along (even if Puff is the only sing along sone he knows!). A vigorous
debate was also held on the appropriate hours to commence activities in the
morning. UNH had graciously arranged a bunch of trips for us, but the 7:00
am start times didn't sit well with people. I opted for the 10:30 canoe trip
myself! After settling on a later time everyone wandered off to bed.

I can't tell you much about the next morning since I slept in till 10:00
(hey! I didn't have to be anywhere till 10:30). Canoeing was nice and
relaxing, though we didn't go for very long do to some technical
difficulties (like the canoe trailer being locked up and nobody knew the
combo). The rock climbers and mountain bikers all reported having a great time!

Dinner was a gigantic pot of spaghetti, salad and french bread and tasted
great. Thanks again to Pat for the food shopping. Following dinner the
annual spring conference hoe-down competitiion started. Well, actually it
was just square dance lessons but it was lots of fun! Many layers of
clothing got removed as the dancers heated up from all the movement (which
was mostly running across the 'square' to get back to where they should have
ended up, but didn't because they got confused with the Alamande left and
dosey does.... spelling anyone?) We also did some Contra dancing which was
fun as well.

Following the square dance everyone gathered around the campfire for IOCA
elections. Tim Hall was ceremoniously nominated for IOCA executive secretary
(which is the person who does all the work!). He gave a rousing speach in
which he stated that "it would be an exceptionally good idea.... if you
didn't vote for me!" He lost the election by only one vote...

Then marshmellow roasting commenced. Some unnamed soul from RPI's outing
club wins the award for the most sacrificial marshmellow toasting technique
in which he placed the marshmellows on his fingers and toasted them. Believe
it or not they actually toasted and he didn't seem to burn his hands to
badly. I guess he should be glad the marshmellows didn't catch on fire!

Paul Jackson then demonstrated that South Africans don't get out much by
leading us in not one, not two, but at least 5 crazy songs all of which
required goofy hand motions. Lots of laughs were had as people poked their
eyes out trying to follow along <grin>

Then we played a game of energy ball which really can't be described in this
e-mail. Just ask someone who went along to describe a "schwaaa". Theresa
DiDonata, Helen Johnson, and Carolyn Flesner kicked butt for MIT but were
beat our by a woman from RPI (who is an MIT alum) in the final round! Helen
also wins the award for getting the men around her not to "schwaaaa" but to
"schwing". It was dark and we're not quite sure what happened on that side
of the campfire but you can bet it was ugly. (Remember, this is the woman
who stripped off her clothes last month to take a snow bath at Intervale...
and to think that this is the Queen's subject. tisk. tisk.)

Some more campfire silliness commenced with the moose game (ask helen how to
play) and then some 5 minute mysteries / riddles were played. Tim Hall still
does not believe any of them to be true even though he was outvoted 30 to 1.
Slowly people wandered off to bed as the night wore on.

Sunday morning we awoke for a group picture (the negatives of which should
be torched I'm sure) and then packed up. I can't say anything about the
day's activities because I had to return to Boston to meet with my advisor
about my thesis.

All in all this was a great trip. It was really neat to meet lots of other
people from the school's in the area and talk about their experiences in the
outdoors and in life in general. I would encourage everyone to come to the
Fall Conference which is hosted by RPI at Lake George NY the first weekend
in October. It should be a great time!

MIT also graciously volunteered (I volunteered them...for those of you who
don't know I'm leaving in June) to host next years spring IOCA conference.
Place is TBA but you can be sure that it'll be just as fun.  (And to appease
the board... I'll be back in the area then and will be willing to help out!) 

That's it... you made it to the end! Have a great week.

Scott
-------------------------------------
Scott FitzGerald

MIT Outing Club
Board of Directors / Intervale Cabin Manager

(617) 253-2988 (MITOC office)
(617) 253-9311 (work)
(617) 441-5307 (home)

sfitzger@mit.edu
http://www.mit.edu/activities/mitoc


