Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA13196; Tue, 21 Apr 98 15:49:26 EDT
Received: from LL.MIT.EDU by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA29883; Tue, 21 Apr 98 15:49:10 EDT
Received: by ll.mit.edu (4.1/LL-1.3) id AA01828; Tue, 21 Apr 98 15:48:33 EDT
Return-Path: <abbot@ll.mit.edu>
Message-Id: <9804211548.AA17883@LL.MIT.EDU>
From: "Abbot, Richard" <abbot@ll.mit.edu>
Subject: The other circus trip
Date: Tue, 21 Apr 98 15:48:05 -0400
X-Priority: 3
X-Mailer: Internet Mail Service (5.0.1457.3)

	Howdy,

	This'll be short, just a short archive of the *other* circus
trip to Waquoit Bay and Washburn Island on Cape Cod.  And this'll be
mostly informative since this trip would make a nice and fairly safe
canoe or sea kayak trip for those looking for a sheltered
sea-paddling/island-walking day trip.

	First, to thank Annie, Andrew, Cathy, Fred, Karl, Mathew,
Myself, Po-Hsiu, Scott, Stephanie, and Steve for good
participataion/organization/shared-leadership.

	This trip took club sea kayaks and canoe to Waquoit Bay near
East Falmouth on Cape Cod.  Waquoit Bay is a national estuarine reserve,
protected for research and education - not quite sure why the power
boats are there though.  The shallow, beach-surrounded,
fairly-warm-water bay averages 5-6 feet in depth at high tide and is
rich in estuary life.  We saw some neat osprey and swans as well as lots
of other sea and land birds and the usual clam rakers up to their chests
out in the bay raking up the quahog clams.

	We camped on Washburn Island, long and narrow, wooded, 355 acre,
state owned.  It is difficult to get reservations in the summer which
you would need then, and there is good likelihood for biting insects in
the summer, but we had the place to ourselves for the weekend with no
bugs.  This island has the only primitive legal camping on the Cape,
although we didn't get to the actual 11 site campground but camped in
another obviously used camping area that was closer to paddle to.  Next
time(?) and for anybody else, paddle further down the island for the
real campsites and outhouses.

	The primary activity was sea kayaking, a number of trips, a
paddle of a mile or so across the very pleasant bay and through a narrow
neck and out into the ocean and pretty neat Martha's Vineyard Sound.
Martha's Vineyard seemed a tempting paddle away, maybe some day.  On one
trip a couple of us also paddled into a small bog surrounded pond in one
corner of the bay where we ran into a large flight(?) of swans.  The bay
was completely calm, the ocean had chop to small swells over the two
days.  The other significant activity was hiking along the islands
overgrown roads, and when people weren't paddling it was just hanging
out and relaxing.

	How we got there: we put in at a boat ramp near Edward's
Boathouse on MA 28 a little west of East Falmouth.  After unloading,
cars were parked in big lot by the road.  We paddled about a mile down
the Childs River, then made a sharp left and went up the Seapit River
about a half mile, then right at the Osprey nest into Waquoit Bay where
the island is on the right.  The proper campground is near the middle of
the island, past the sandbar and is pretty obvious by a large beach area
and the yellow roofed outhouses back a ways.  With canoes and sea kayaks
we carried lots lots of gear and made ourselves quite comfortable.  

	Seems like a good second circus trip ? for the future.  I may do
a day trip there before the greenhead flies come out in mid-July.

	Happy paddling,
	Rick
	    
