Date: Tue, 12 May 1998 10:23:55 -0400 (EDT)
From: Helen Johnson <hjohnson@plume.mit.edu>
Subject: Trip report: Intervale Keyholder Weekend 

Having been severely lashed by my own weapon, I thought I'd better deliver
some kind of summary of what we got up to last weekend........sorry it's
a bit out of date (and so long and rambling!)

The advance party of four (Scott, Ivo, Chris and Helen) assembled at the
boatshed on Friday evening (May 1st) to help load the obligatory kayaks
onto Scott's truck....we didn't REALLY expect to paddle them (we were
going to Intervale to work on the cabin, right?), but it's not a MITOC
trip unless the Bronco is loaded to the hilt, so load the kayaks we did!
And then we were on our way, headed for that well renowned Friday-night
hotspot Home Depot, where we passed a happy hour spending MITOC
money......and planning the great construction projects that lay ahead.

As soon as we entered New Hampshire the rain started....and didn't stop
for the whole weekend (which, I'm told, was fairly sunny in Boston!).  But
no matter.....spirits were far from damp!  On the track up to the cabin 
Scott's truck buffeted it's way over and around the rocks and trees like
some kind of rollercoaster. (Driver's tip - watch out for the BIG rock in
the centre of the track about 50 yards below the cabin!). We moved the
supplies in and collected some water from the spring (nowhere near as much
fun when there's no snow and sled involved......Scott didn't mention the
wheelbarrow until later!), and were about to settle down for the evening
when noises were heard in the woods below and we were forced to mount a
rescue mission.  Hector, the new cabin manager, was having trouble finding
the cabin!  

After furthering his education (and ours) on the shallow nature of the
gene pool in North Conway, we retreated to the cabin and contemplated
sleeping on the deck .....in the rain.  Being MIT engineers, the response
to Helen's suggestion of "let's just throw a tarp over to keep us dry" was
an elaborate awning built by headlamp 12 foot above the deck - most
impressive!  Scott had judged the size of the thing perfectly (who said
men always overestimate size?!), and we sat smugly underneath as the by
now heavy rain ran off it.  None of us could resist sleeping on the deck,
and most of us had a fantastic, dry nights sleep.  Chris, who should have
slept better than any of us due to his rather feminine double 6"-thick air
mattress (can I suggest that MITOC acquires some of these for rental?),
complained of getting a little soggy, but nobody else seemed to have a
problem!

Our first task of the day was to chop down a tree which was overhanging 
the cabin and starting to rot at the base.....not to mention the fact
that it got in the way of star-gazing from the deck! ( Did anybody see any
stars that weekend?!).  What we would have liked to have been a painless
and swift process turned into a slow and agonizing death as we tried to
get the tree on to the ground - gravity wasn't much help, but
fortunately Mark and Gigi turned up in time to help us pull the tree from
the forked branches of one of its neighbours to another....and
another.....until we decided that the only answer was a cunning plan
comprising Scott's truck, a sledgehammer and a snow-sled ........let's
just say that it worked and leave it at that!

Whilst Scott and Mark chopped the tree into firewood, Ivo cleared the
track and trails of winter debris, Gigi and Hector washed the cabin
ceiling (the first acrobatics of the weekend!), and Chris and Helen set to
work on THE COAT RACK.  Over the course of the next few hours the ceiling
was stuccoed, and then finished off neatly with metal flashing (Scott's
identity as Spiderman now revealed!), the end wall was painted, door trims
were fitted, tiles were re-stuck, and the cabin was generally given the
TLC it deserves.  With the help of Carolyn's Stud Sensor (not too
effective this weekend.....perhaps it requires the 'Carolyn' attachment to
work properly), aswell as 20 or 30 drill holes, THE COAT RACK was
attached to the wall.  Not only useful for hanging coats (unlike the
plastic hooks it replaced!), this new piece of Intervale decor has
character and style (....no it's NOT supposed to be straight on the
wall!).

Alex, Zoltan and Mike arrived to help with the gutter attachment (another
feat of MIT engineering......it now DOES slope enough for water to
actually flow along it!), aswell as the window-washing (have they been
done since the cabin was built?!), the reinforcement of the picnic table,
and numerous other little jobs.  Alex put more effort into his hammering
than most......unfortunately the hammer wasn't quite up to it!

Just before dark Scott ran through the keyholder details, and those who
had to head back to Boston (Alex and Zoltan) left us.  Plans to
kayak and/or swim in Echo Lake were abandoned due to the pouring
rain and the cold.  Whilst Chris and Helen prepared dinner, the rest of
the group optimistically prepared a campfire in the hope that the rain
would stop before the evening was out.  

Chicken-a-la-Cayenne was hotter than some people were happy with (!), but
was generally well received......since this is at least the second
over-spicing incident at Intervale since Christmas, can I suggest that we
buy a new sprinkle cap for the cayenne pepper?!  Dinner was followed by a
quick game of Energy Bowl (Butterscotch flavour British stuff....mmm
mmmm) with a communal spoon, and then a few hours around the campfire.
Thanks to Scott for introducing us all to the delicacy of Jiffy Pop Carbon
Pebbles, and to Mike for showing us how it SHOULD be done!  And of course
to Mark for "mounting" Chris with a marshmallow and hence keeping him
quiet!

Hector and Ivo made plans to hike Mt. Washington the following day (see
their trip report below), so decided to get to bed early and not join
Scott, Chris and Helen on the deck for a second night in the rain.  They
left at about 6am without disturbing the rest of us, who slept through
until 9am and then enjoyed a leisurely breakfast before heading back to
Boston.

Thanks to Scott for being such a POLITE slave-driver (and for not letting
me anywhere near the chainsaw!), and to everyone else for a fun weekend
in the rain!  Given that this was his last keyholder weekend, Scott
deserves heaps of thanks for all the weekends he has run over the last
year or two (even if his motives are questionable on occasion!)......
thankyou!

QUOTE OF THE WEEKEND:  "I think I need to be re-mounted....." (Chris)



