Date: Sat, 31 Oct 1998 21:06:09 EST
From: "Matthew T. Reagan" <reagan@MIT.EDU>

Trip Report -- MITOC Slopfest '98
---------------------------------

On Saturday, October 31, seven MITOCers left MIT at a prompt 6:30am
for a day hike to the Kinsmans in Franconia Notch, NH. 

Thanks to speedy, but safe driving, Cindy, Susan, Krzysztof, Audrey,
Marie, Aleks, and myself were ready to go at the Lafayette Place
trailhead soon after 9am.  Our goal was to ascend North Kinsman, with
stops at Lonesome Lake and Kinsman Pond along the way.  The weather,
which was a question the night before, had calmed to just some wind
and clouds, with a few gaps showing blue sky above our heads.

After less than a mile and a few hundred feet of vertical, we
encountered our first patch of wet snow.  A deep low over Nova Scotia
had been pumping cold air and moisture down into NH for two days, so a
few flakes were expected.  Otherwise, the Lonesome Lake trail was
wide, well-maintained, and got us to the shores of the lake in a
little over an hour.  At the lake, though, the snow was becoming
significant, with about half an inch of sloppy wet snow covering the
trail.  Temperatures were in the forties so all of it was melting, and
combined with the waterlogged ground from a rainy summer and fall it
expanded wet spots on the trail into sizable ponds.  One slip off a
log bridge and you got wet feet.  However, the view was nice across
the lake, and nobody was complaining at our rest stop at the hut (even
the person who wore--Gasp!--sneakers).

From the back of the hut we traversed the bottom of the Fishin' Jimmy
trail (part of the AT) around the base of N. Kinsman.  This trail rises
and falls between small mountain streams, and each level section was
filled with deep troughs of slush and mud.  Some of the rock scrambles
were difficult due to the sloppy coating, and everyone managed to
thoroughly soak themselves splashing through it all.  Things only got
worse as we began to ascend the steeper sections, with every handhold
covered in wet snow and every patch of ground covered in something
liquid.  There was slop everywhere.  White slop, grey slop, tan slop,
brown slop, black slop (with a foul odor), slop with little floaty
bits, slop on top of ice on top of slop, and worst of all, slop
falling from trees.  Yes, all of that pretty white coating was melting
off the trees and falling on us.  Grabbing a tree to avoid falling
into a slop puddle resulted in wet snow dumping down the back of your
shirt.  So, despite seasonable and relatively calm weather, we all got
completely soaked.

At the top of the climb, we traversed a partly-frozen swamp and
located the Kinsman Pond shelter.  While everyone loaded on extra
clothes, I fired up the stove for tea and hot chocolate.  Despite the
warm drinks, everyone was feeling cold and wet, and considering the
time and the difficulty of the trail so far, everyone agreed that
doing the 1.2 mile summit loop in the fog just wasn't worth it.  So,
after a nice lunch, we headed back down toward the lake.  However,
during the forty minutes that had passed since we'd been this way, a
lot of snow and ice had melted, and the frozen swamp was now the
Ultimate slop reservoir.  It was knee-deep and smelled particularly
foul, and I discovered this through direct personal experience.

The trip down was less than trivial.  A lot of snow had melted, and
the slop was replaced by running water.  Grasping trees to prevent a
fall brought down the last of the tree-slop, and a few good slides
were seen along the way.  The wooden steps that made climbing easy
were now just another slippery obstacle.  But, everyone kept moving in
the face of rising wind and falling temperatures and made it back to
the cars by 3:30.

Important lessons learned on this trip?  1) An all-synthetic wardrobe
is your best friend, even BEFORE winter school 2) The clothing you
climb up in always gets soaked, so bring something extra for the
colder summits 3) A stove and instant hot chocolate can solve most
attitude problems, and 4) Woodstock Station (N. Woodstock, NH) has
half-price appetizers on Saturdays from 2-5 if you sit in the bar.

Thanks for a great hike, everyone!  See you all in Winter School,
where the snow stays in solid form.
