Date: Wed, 20 Jan 1999 14:55:54 EST
From: "Matthew T. Reagan" <reagan@MIT.EDU>

           Trip Report: Mt. Pierce via the Crawford Path
                    Sunday, January 17, 1999

        After leaving MIT bright and early, ten MITOC Winter Schoolers
met at the AMC Crawford Notch hostel for a day hike up Mt. Pierce in
the Southern Presidentials.  By 10am Rebecca, Darren, Marie,
Krzysztof, Dave, Juli, and Olivera, and I were packed, suited up, and
ready to play in the snow.

After some miserable weather earlier in the weekend, we were greeted
by partly cloudy skies and some light flurries.  After a group
portrait in front of the trailhead sign, we started up the Crawford
Path and found that the trail was well-packed and smooth, despite a
wicked crust in the woods.  The Friday night ice storm had coated many
of the trees with a light layer of ice, giving us a beautiful backdrop
for a climb.  The Path gives an even, moderate grade, with few steep
spots and a beaten path just wide enough for a snowshoe-clad hiker.
The first two or so miles passed without incident, and we reached the
junction with the Mizpah Cutoff ahead of schedule.

From here, the Path slanted north, climbing the ridge below
Mt. Pierce.  A few clearings to the west gave brief views of the
Notch, and soon the trees decreased in size (and the snow became
deeper) as we approached treeline.  We passed a few campsites along
the way, as well as several other groups headed to and from the
summit.

We broke out into the alpine zone after dressing up in everything in
our packs, and we were greeted by fairly good conditions--fog, 20-30
mph winds, and temperatures in the "balmy" mid-20's.  Some hardy souls
decided they liked this weather so much they'd camp in it, and their
tent seemed to have survived the night quite well.  Several other
groups joined us at the summit, and a few of them were happy that we'd
brought a compass ("No, that path goes out onto the ridge, not down to
the parking lot").  Unfortunately, some equipment problems appeared
around this time, as some sets of snowshoes wouldn't stay on and the
summit winds made this a bad place to be adjusting equipment.
Luckily, the summit had been blown clean of snow, and the ice wasn't
particularly dangerous.

Heading south from the summit, we descended into the scrub and
followed the lightly-tracked Webster Cliff Trail toward Mizpah Springs
Hut.  The trail was sheltered from the northwest winds, and deep snow
and an icy coating made for surreal and beautiful scenery.  We hiked
over breakable crust through scrub, pine woods, through a small col,
and on the lesser summit of Pierce broke out of the clouds and got our
first views of the surrounding mountains, including Jackson, Attitash,
Chocorua, and Carrigain.  The sun had come out everywhere but the
Presidential summits, and we enjoyed a beautiful sunny day.  Below the
lookouts, the trail dropped steeply toward the Jackson-Pierce col,
providing several opportunities for glissade and self-arrest practice.
Most people didn't bother with the self-arrest part, though, since
windblown powder made for a nice soft slide through the woods.  We
arrived at Mizpah Spring tired, snow-covered, and hungry.

We weren't the only hungry ones on the mountain, though.  While we
heated water for drink and filled up on fat and sugar, a hungry fox
came right up to our picnic spot.  Everyone got great photos as it
circled just a few feet around our group, smelling all of our
equipment and checking to see if we'd be generous.  We declined to
share--with the fox's best interests in mind--and it went on its way.

The cookies and hot chocolate ran out around 3:30, and we headed down
the Mizpah Cutoff with the sun quickly setting in the west.  The
cutoff was only lightly tracked, and those who kept their snowshoes in
their packs had some serious trouble with the breakable crust, but
less than a mile later we connected with the Crawford Path and had a
speedy descent on the well-packed trail.  We managed to reach the
trailhead in a mere 90 minutes with only a bit of easy jogging.  After
a flash photo by the trailhead sign, we loaded into our cars and
finished the day with some pizza from Elvios in Lincoln.

Thanks to everyone for a great trip!
