From: Matthew Hollingworth <mholling@MIT.EDU>
Date: Wed, 20 Jan 1999 16:35:46 -0500
Subject: Mt Liberty Trip Report

The long weekend just passed provided a group of hikers with the
opportunity to experience winter camping first-hand. In keeping with the
spirit of Winter School thus far, the experience was a wet one rather
than a powerdery one!

Our group consisted of nine people in all: Matthew, Hector, Alea, A.J,
Ben, Gigi, James, Jonah and Ron. From both Boston and Camelot, we
assembled at the Flume Information center at around ten o'clock, and
after the usual faffing around, we ambled down the bike path leading to
the trailhead. Unfortunately, in winter, bike paths are taken over by
snowmobiles, the bane of winter hikers. We were happy to arrive at the
trailhead proper, about a mile down the path, and leave their ruckus
behind.

The Liberty Springs Trail proceeds gently up the flanks of Mt Liberty,
and the well-packed snow made it fairly easy going. After crossing
several frozen streams, the trail began to increase in grade, eventually
settling on a reasonably steep, sustained pitch. Our rests became
correspondingly more frequent, as lapsed backpackers were re-acquainted
with their loads. The clear, warm conditions made for good hiking, and
the campsite was reached without incident.

The Liberty Springs campsite consists of a group of tent platforms
nestled amongst the trees, about a half-mile from the top of the
Mountain. A frozen door prevented people from availing themselves of the
nearby outhouse! We set up four tents on the group platforms,
discovering the added challenge of staking out tents in the snow.
Free-standing tents are definitely convenient.

We fought the urge to start melting snow, and instead hiked up the
remainder of the trail to its junction on the Franconia Ridge. We walked
along the last few hundred yards to Mount Liberty's summit crag as the
sun approached the horizon, and got out of the trees to greet the
glorious alpenglow of sunset. With only a few distant clouds to the
West, and low banks of clouds along the Presidential Range, we had an
expansive view in all directions. Lafayette and the Cannon Cliffs were
speckled with snow, and the bright white summit of Mt Washington poked
up above its ocean of cloud. Despite the eagerness of a neophyte
ice-climber, we dismissed the Flume Slide Trail as an option for
returning to our cars the next day! The entire Pemigawasset wilderness
was also in clear view, allowing people to get a geography lesson from
James, our resident White Mountains expert.

After harassing an innocent pair of hikers with multiple cameras for
group photos, we headed back down to our campsite in the fading light.
Having hiked up later in the day, Gigi was awaiting our return. We
started melting snow and preparing food for dinner. Our tasty cuisine
for the night consisted of cous-cous, macaroni & cheese, and instant
mashed potatos, all with healthy doses of butter or cheese. Cooking
proceeded smoothly, although I will now no longer refer to my
Whisperlite as "my trusty stove," since it let me down by losing
pressure and fizzling out in the face of the advancing cold. Hector's
Primus multi-fuel, while sounding like a small jet engine, proved to be
more reliable.

Since there were few complaints about cold the next morning, it is safe
to assume that the night was relatively warm, for four thousand feet up
in New Hampshire in January. We awoke to an overcast sky, and as we
broke camp it promisingly began to snow. In the record time it took us
to disassemble our tents and melt the snow that we needed, the snow
became more pellet-like, and by the time we were on the trail it was not
snow any more! After another trip to the top, we debated wether to
return via Little Haystack and the Falling Waters trail, or by our path
of ascent. Our decision on the latter proved to be a good one, as the
rain had become quite heavy later in the day. After some enjoyable
butt-sliding on the way down, we arrived at our cars, taking less than
two hours in all.

Taking a poll of our bedraggled group, I was pleased to find that the
rain had not for the most part stopped people from having an ejoyable
time. That, or they were too dazed to be coherent. With some of the
people in our group, it was hard to tell the difference... ;)

Thanks to all our group for a great trip!
