Date: Fri, 18 Jun 1999 14:22:07 -0400
From: Matthew Hollingworth <mholling@MIT.EDU>
Subject: TR: Weekday Gunks Excursion

A beautiful, cool Wednesday in mid June. We all should be working. What
better way to spend the day than a trip to the Gunks?

Being at the Gunks on a weekday is a revelation. Gone are the crowds,
the noise, and the line-ups on classic routes. Sure, we aren't alone,
but it feels like we have the place to ourselves anyway - and what a
glorious feeling it is!

Have no doubt; going to the Gunks for a single day definitely
constitutes an epic, driving-wise. (Worth it? You bet.) Leaving Boston a
little after 5 am, we arrive at the base of the cliff at about ten. We
start with an easy climb - I'm fairly new to leading, and my partner has
only climbed a handful of times. A good combination - anything I can
easily lead, my partner can probably follow. As I set off up the ramp at
the start of the climb, the sun is shining, and the pervasive greenery
moves slowly in the gentle breeze.

At the top of the ramp is a good belay spot, but it's much too soon to
stop. I eye the GT ledge, and figure I can make it to a belay there
before running out of rope. From the ramp, the route follows a big
left-facing corner, before traversing out left, and up to the ledge. On
my way up, I find a good spot for one of my new tri-cams. (This most
peculiar form of protection finds its biggest legion of fans right here
at the Gunks, so I figured I'd better find out what the fuss was about.)

The corner leans further to the left, and directs me out onto a face,
across from which lies a perfect belay stance, maybe twenty feet below
the GT ledge. (I'm running a little short of rope by now.) The traverse
proves harmless, but nevertheless, I clip the rope a few times along the
way to protect my partner. Arriving at my chosen belay spot, I construct
my anchor. I sling a rock, put in four pieces, and clip a rusty piton. A
six-element anchor maybe overkill, but what's the rush - I'm not anxious
to leave this peaceful, lofty perch. Besides, I need the practice!

When everything is to my satisfaction, I get comfortable, take up the
slack, and put my partner on belay. The unmistakable clink of metal
indicates that she's on her way up. (The unmistakable ten-minute delays
indicate that my nut placements were a little _too_ solid!). After a
while, a white helmet pops up at the top of the ramp. I hurriedly haul
in the rope to keep up as she scampers over to the corner. (The rope
movement pulls free that tri-cam, which slides down the rope to the next
biner. I'll have to work on those tri-cam placements...)

While I wait for another stubborn stopper to come loose, I look out at
the beautiful vista which makes the Gunks such a wonderful place to
climb. I am fortunate enough to be visited by a pair of falcons, which
glide by at eye level, no more than fifty feet away. Their lazy circling
is quite mesmerizing to watch.

After she pries that stopper out, my partner's progress up the corner
and across to the belay is fairly rapid - we'll have to do a harder
climb next! She clips in to the anchor, and returns my gear to me. As
I'd hoped, she's as elated over her first multi-pitch climb as I was,
when I first came here. (I have always felt compelled to share the
delights of this, most liberating of pursuits, just as others have done
with me.) We stay a while to admire the view. There is something about
hanging off a cliff, encompassed in a sea of rock and air, that soothes
the soul, and calms the insidious anxieties of life.

I set off again on the final, short pitch to the top. Up to the GT
ledge, weaving around a couple of large but easy roofs, and in short
order I'm at the top. What a beautiful, fun pitch! A luxurious bed of
grass awaits me, and two trees provide an easy anchor. After a
substantial disassembly effort, taking down my previous anchor, my
second climbs up after me, finding those intimidating roofs suprisingly
easy to overcome.

We sit at the top, legs dangling over the edge, the sun on our arms, and
know with certainty that life can be good. I think about those falcons,
soaring along the crag. I wonder why we spend so much of our time
pursuing elusive goals, and indistinct notions of a meaningful life,
when we find the most happiness in the escape from such pursuits. Maybe
I should have been a bird.

