Received: from SOUTH-STATION-ANNEX.MIT.EDU by po10.MIT.EDU (5.61/4.7) id AA24857; Wed, 29 Jan 97 09:40:59 EST
Received: from guardian.holonet.net by MIT.EDU with SMTP
	id AA25701; Wed, 29 Jan 97 09:39:24 EST
Received: from lincoln (root@localhost) by holonet.net with UUCP
	id GAA07811; Wed, 29 Jan 1997 06:39:22 -0800
From: Cathy_Lavelle@lincnet.org (Cathy Lavelle)
Reply-To: Cathy_Lavelle@lincnet.org
Subject: a very late trip report
Date: 28 Jan 1997 13:49:25 GMT
Message-Id: <403804027.160418820@lincnet.org>
Organization: Lincoln Public Schools

This is a late trip report for last weekend Jan 18-19 (so some of the data may
be wrong)

A backpacking trip was planned for Sunday night on Cardigan Mt. NH.

I told my merry band of followers that I wanted to leave the Student Center
at 7:30am Sunday morning, sharp. Ha. We left at 8:30. It was below zero,
according to my "If you inhale through your nose and your snot freezes it
must be below zero" test.

The big joke of the morning was "We'll stop for hot water in Alexandria."
Alexandria looked like something out of "Little House on the Prairie." No
water. So we decided to go on to the trail head and bother the people at the
AMC lodge there for hot water. They gave up bad looks for going into the
private lodge, but we got water.

There is huge sledding hill near the lodge, and as we finnished packing we
"ooh"ed and "ahh"ed at the crazy people plunging down the hill towards the
trees and snowbanks at the bottom. Unfortunatly, one guy in his 40s slammed
into a snowbank shoulder-first at about 30 mph. He groaned in pain as a few
sledders looked on. Being an EMT, and a noble mitoc trip leader, I went over
to help out. To make a long story short, I spent 45 minutes leading a minor
"rescue" of this guy til the ambulance showed up. We began hiking at about
12:45pm, but that's o.k. because it was only just over 2 miles to our camp.

Although there was lots of snow, the trail was nicely packed down (except for
one part). We stopped often to eat, drink, and soak up the sun. The view was
fantastic as we got up onto some rock slabs. Unfortunatly we lost the trail
as it went back into the woods, so we had to bushwack a bit. It was tiring,
but the sun was shining brightly as we re-found the trail and headed on.

Shortly before dark, we found a nice exposed camp, and settled in. The sunset
was the best I've ever seen. The stars and a full moon were out before clouds
came in to keep up warm. Cashman and I spent our evening heating water on the
two functional stoves we had (whisperlite and coleman) while we admired the
nice paperweight we had carried up the mountain (the cartridge stove which
didn't work in zero degrees). Nine people devoured 8 boxes of Near East
Couscous before heading to bed. Luckily, it was barely below zero that night.
The night before, it had been 20 below.

In the morning, Cashman and I resumed our posts at the stoves heating water
for the trek over the top of Cardigan and back down. Everyone's water had
interresting remnants of couscous in it...maybe Cashman should have washed
his pot...:)  We started hiking at a very late 10:30am.

The top of Cardigan, although it looked far away, came quickly. The views
were hampered by clouds, but there were nice snowflakes to keep up company.
Very high winds on the summit moved us along, and we were soon headed down.
With in a few hours we were back to the trailhead. 

The AMC caretaker came out and told me that my patient had a broked elbow and
bruised ribs, and had stayed the night at the hospital. All of our cars
started and we went on our merry way.

Lessons Learned
___________
1. Get hot water sooner rather than later, unless you are sure about
availability
2. Bring at least one functional stove for every three people
3. Bring "booties" for camp - they can be warmer than boots.

