From: Hector Briceno <hbriceno@mit.edu>
To: "Hector Briceno" <hbriceno@MIT.EDU>,
        "Janelle Bosek" <jbosek@wellesley.edu>,
        "Shana Green" <sgreen@wellesley.edu>,
        "Amanda Lahikainen" <alahikainen@wellesley.edu>,
        "Kim Luu" <kluu@MIT.EDU>, "Adam Crook" <norker@hotmail.com>,
        "Carolyn Flesner" <flesner@ccs.neu.edu>,
        "Scott FitzGerald" <stf@alum.mit.edu>,
        "Brygg Ullmer" <ullmer@media.mit.edu>,
        "James Patten" <jpatten@media.mit.edu>,
        "Elron Yellin" <elron@alum.mit.edu>,
        "Paulina Varchavskaia" <paulina@ai.mit.edu>,
        "Camelia-mariana turcu" <camelia@MIT.EDU>,
        "Greg Kuhnen" <kuhneng@MIT.EDU>, "Sunil Tankha" <stankha@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Fall Lake George'99 Trip Report

This trip report reflects
some of my impressions from the trip

Some were forgotten, 
some were censurable, 
some were not gotten, 
but most were unmeasurable


I encourage other people to write a little about what they did also.
All the names of the trip members were changed to hide their
identities, any resemblance or equality with their real names is pure
coincidence :-)

It takes only three words to describe it: "it was awesome" (pronounced
oh(deep)some).  

So it all started for me at 2pm, helping Scott to put together MITOC's
new super canoe rack with dual supporting bars.  The beast is
extremely stable, I had no problems putting and working with canoes in
the higher racks.  
Around 3:45-4:00 other people showed up, and in no time we had all
canoes and sea kayaks placed on board.  We waited until 4:30 for all
the people to arrive, we even waited for people who were not even
coming in our car (due to a screw up from the organizer...but we won't
mention any names).  So finally around 5 or so we departed in two
cars.  The plan was to meet a third car, carrying the wellesley women
at the Carlton Rest Are in the pike.  

After experiencing rush hour traffic (the grand scheme of things) we
made it to the Service Plaze, where all the others were already
sitting and having a joyious conversation.  I commented how much I
like Burger King fries and proposed that they should sell them by the
pound.  My idea was well received.  

We carried on.  I noticing that there was a large queue in the pumps,
decided to fill gas at the next gas station.  After caravaning for an
hour, my car, followed by Janelle's car, pull over into a service
plaza;  the plan would be to put gas, and then catch up to Scott.  The
girls pull in behind me, to go to the candy can.

Well, as you may have already guessed (not really but it sounds better
that way), we never caught up to Scott (from just a 10 minute delay)
until we got to Lake George.  It is hard to understand where we lost
so much time.  But I would like to point out that the mall in saratoga
springs is very nice, and had a nice selection of movies.

Well, we were finally there.  At 45 minutes past mid-night, the canoes
were ready for launch, and the people psyched.  We had an extra spot
in the canoes so, Eric II (not Breon and hence the II) shared a canoe
with Janelle 'Ms Canoe' Bosek.  Most people then realized that it is
not trivial to maintain a canoe in a straight course (and even keeping
it from heading the opposite direction for that matter, but we won't
mention any names, or say that we should not be having problems
because I have done this before or anything of that sort).  Even with
all the sarcasm, I really don't think is that easy.  The directions
given for the island were almost too simple: just follow the left
shore until you see a light, which eventually will spell out ROC.
Well, there were in fact too simple, since we hallucinated, or
wishfully thought many other lights were our final destination.  After
perceiving some disorientation (that is the people in the canoe, as we
all know, me being the trip leader and being there before, knew where
we were), we heard voices and saw two sea kayaks in the distance.
Ahh, some relief, hopefully some people who can tell us how much
longer.  Unfortunately, for us, fortunately for them, it was Carolyn
and 'active' Adam.  Adam, thinking how dull is kayaking for 2hrs
decided that add a swimming component.  He being mystified by the moon
and dazzled by the stars and mountains, claims to have seen something
jumping out of the water, which toppled his kayak.  (next year will
combe the lake for the Loch Monster :-).  Anyways we carried on.  Ahh
some relief, some lights, unluckily it was not what we were looking
for.  fifteen minutes after, I saw the light, which others would say I
was sure that was it beyond any reasonable doubt (to the point of
gambling one of the most precious pearls and even the slightly bigger
one (by one mm or two) if you know what I mean).  After seeing the
moon shine, and stars change orbits, we eventually made it.  I stayed
behind in my kayak trailing (and also because the last canoe had my
gear, but this had nothing to do with it).  We arrived at the beatiful
island of the-name-avoids-me.  

We were informed that this was not the same Turtle Island of last
year, but a slightly smaller one.  Well slightly smaller turned out to
be the size of my living room.  I am exagerating a bit (really?) but
the island was small to the point that men really had to do a number
one in an outhouse, since otherwise it would be impossible to do it in
the privacy...

We pitch our tents along the other tents in Tent City II.  After
settling down, we sat around the fire pit for a night of conversations
and discoveries.  Stories, Issues, Life, Outlooks, Attitudes and many
topics were discussed.  The fire kept us warm.  The QOT appeared, when
after querying for wood, the womanperson fetching the wood said "I am
going to get some wood, I am going to find a big one."  I don't know,
I am just repeat what I hear :-).  The time passed until the point of
no return.  A bunch of us stayed to watch the sunrise, which was a bit
tardy due to the big mountain in front of it.  It ended up coming out
at 7:45 or so.  Shanna 'I breath nature' Green would say really
enjoyed, I would swear I saw a big vortex forming around the top of
her head, were all the majestic enery of nature was flowing to her,
but then again it could have been the effects of lack of sleep.  Well,
the sun was out and it was time for a nap.

We decided we would attempt going climbing again this year.  The
previous year experienced was marginal, so I was skeptical.  Heather,
'Active' Adam, Karen, Scott, Elron, Paulina, Kim, Sunil, and I headed
out for an approximate target, a big patch of rock that could be seen
from the island.  We left this marginal information around camp,
should someone else try to join us.  Arriving on mainland, we
scrambled/hike/bushwack in an attempt to find this place.  Incredibly,
we found a good piece of rock after one hour.  (I really thought we
would not find it, but of course I can only say that after the fact
:-) Well, the rock looked very dirty (can we say lichen galore?) and
crappy and loose, exactly as Eric Breon described it: "I took a trip 2
years ago, at a place much closer.  Unfortunately, however, the rock
where i climbed is complete sh__.  i picked a nice beginner route,
went up to clean it, and in the process broke off the majority of the
handholds...".  I was pleased or rather excited (I will not say
orgasmic since is probably not PC, although I was thrilled) by a nice
crack line on a corner adjacent to the leadable crappy climb.  I mean
this crack, started as an nice hand jamming crack with good feet
placement, it moved up 30 feet until reaching a ledge, from which a
corner was formed by two slightly overhanding faces, leaving a hand
size crack in the middle.

I lead the climb up the crappy route so we can get to the ledge to
setup the other route.  I will say it is not pleasant climbing up
dirty and loose rock, every hand and foot hold has to be tested and
retested for suitability.  Anyways, I finished the climb, and Scott
relieved me by setting up the anchors for the cool climb.  

<insert favourite sounds here>, that is how good the climb was.  After
Scott set up the climb, while he was coming down, I went up the line
 (this was really the whole reason that I switched, so that I could
try this climb first, but we won't say this outloud).  Everyone got a
chance to go up the nice line, and even try the other climb.  Adam was
even convinced to try it, although he was reluctant.  I guess (hope)
he was pleased, since he really only came down until his hands really
had no bullets left* **.  Incredibly (and pleasantly suprising), we
were startled to hear the voice of two beautiful sirens approach us,
it was indeed, Janelle 'ms canoe' Bosek and Shanna 'nature' Green
actually had gotten up later, and hike up and maybe bump into us.  It
is impressive that they found us, considering we bushwacked for an
hour.  Obviously, both also went up the line.  A beautiful climb, in a
beatiful day, for a beautiful women.

Since we had seen the sunrise, it was obvious that we could not miss
the sunset; and what a better place than the summit of the unknown
mountain that we were on (well an even better place was the clearing
from which we saw it, which was not the summit, but this is not the
point).  The sunset marked the end of the daylight, and the beginning
of the night festivities.  We then proceeded down to the canoes, and
as usual it included some light deprived hiking.  We arrived back to
the island; the music and festivities from the gigantic square dance
could be felt miles away.  I would say there were at least 80-120
people dancing.  After socializing a bit, we proceeded back to the
place of gathering, the fire pit.  The second session of conversations
and camp fire followed.  Elron 'fountain drink winch' Yellin helped
out dispensing refreshments.  We were joined by people from
Northeastern and other schools.  Then, slowly people started to trickle out.
The wind was picking up, so the tents needed to be secured a bit more.
I personally went and check on other people.  After the now christened
'love shack' tent was secured, the cozy comfort slowly drew people to
it, and before we knew it, the majority had moved from the camp fire
to a tent (filled above capacity if it had been checked by the fire
marshall)...The night was windy and tenacious.  Needless to say, we
all were tired and did not see the sunrise the next day.

I was pleasantly suprised to find milk (obviously since they offered
cereal as one of the breakfast options), and hence had my Folger's
coffee.  "The best part of waking up, is Folger's in your cup".  Even
more pleasantly suprised to learn that Amanda, also liked Les
Miserable, and hence I was happy to sing a couple of arias outloud to
help people get up.

The morning had come, and it was time to go home.  Interestingly
enough some people in the island were perhaps insecure about their
departure condition, since the motor boat rented by RPI seemed to
have, how can we say this, let's say that it had an elevation lossage
of 2 or 3 feet (id est, sinking); no one was hurt or anything.  We now
have reports that everyone got off the island.  We said goodbyes and
parted for our two hour paddle out.  Suprisingly, even with rough seas
(which sometimes gave me the willies if people flipped, but no one did
or came close) we made it on time.  And impressively, we manage to get
all the gear and canoes back this year!!


Now the sad and not so sad part of the trip.  As I am fetching my Red
Subaru (1986-1999), I felt it kind of weird driving it out of the lot.
As I parked next to the sandy beach, everyone was impressed by how the
wheels were angled in (and wobbling).  I, being optimistic with my
ex-car, said, "Nah, it should be alright, I will give it a test drive,
and we'll take it from there". The sage 'active' Adam, reasonable
suggested the plan, "Ok, guys so Hector drives his car 20 miles, not
if it breaks down, but when it breaks down, we'll switch cars and...".
So I planed if the car broke down, and the rest planned when the car
breaks down.  The Wellesley car needed to get back soon, so they left
early.  I don't know how, but I saw that James was driving their car
(owned and driven in by Janelle 'ms canoe' bosek); had I known my car
was not going to make it, I would of fought for that spot :-)

Many of us were hungry (you can imagine, after such an awesome
weekend, who had time to eat); so the plan was to go eat, and while we
are ordering I would go with Scott to a garage to have a look at it.
On the drive out, I gave it a little test drive, and it felt fine,
even as the wheel wobbled (as reported on the CB by my car crew on the
Big Bronco behind me).  As we later entered the service station, we
got, what in my option is the fastest hands-free naked eye diagnostic
I ever seen.  The guy at the station, just from looking at the car,
gave the prognosis: "Oh that car is rusted, get a new one."  Waoh that
was quick.  I felt it from under (how dirty does that sound), and
effectively some of the wheel thingys were rusted hence the reason the
tires wobbled.  Few yards after driving out of the gas station, the
car said "ce bien tout" [enough]. The wheels collapsed a bit to the
point of touching the shocks.  Sunil suggested a couple of schemes to
get some money from the car, like getting an international student
leaving the country with full coverage to ram into my car, but I
decided to stay within the margin of the law.  To make the story
short, the car is right now in Lake George, donated to the good cause
as a helping aid for the fire department in their training, from which
I will say no more details. (we were shown how they use them, and my
impression is that they must learn something from tearing cars apart
as they see how fast they can retrieve a dummy from a burning car.)  I
am satisfied with the places it took me and the experiences we shared,
so although I will miss him, I enjoyed his company.

The rest of the trip was a pleasant drive back to boston, getting over
my ex-car, and thinking what the next one is going to be like? will it
have heating? (most likely, too bad for Matt, you had to endure it (or
rather hibernate in it) on our drive backs from the whites in the
winter) will it have air conditioning? (nah, AC is overrated and it
lowers my milage) will it have four wheels solidly attach to it? (I
take it that everyone has a wheel fall off their cars every once in a
while right?).  Really, thanks again for all the support and extra
hassle that everyone went through, specially Adam, who rode out with
Northeastern so that there would be space for us "should" my car break
down.  Thanks.

Well, all I can say, is that I truly enjoyed everyone's company, I
think I can safely say we all had a blast, and I look forward to next
Fall Lake George and the Spring Conference.

Hector

*see previous trip report for this reference
** waoh, I had never thought about footnotes on trip reports before...

