From: Hector Briceno <hbriceno@graphics.lcs.mit.edu>
Subject: Trip Report: Franconia Ridge Death March
Date: Thu, 14 Oct 1999 11:49:38 -0400 (EDT)

Trip Report: MITOC Presidio Franconia Ridge Death March
Chrissy Guth, Robert Zeithammer, Hector 'Safety' Briceno
October 11th, 1999


So it all started on a naive conversation with Robert 'I have had a
cold and I am not in shape' Zeithammer during dinner one night.  He
tells me that he has a nice little intermediate short day hike in
mind, and that I may be interested.  Being an outdoor person, I
further inquire in the details of his little opus.

The idea is to hike some 13 four thousand peaks in a big loop around
the franconia ridge with Chrissy 'I like jogging the boston marathon
route at night' Guth.  Noticing that Chrissy, the famous MITOC
marathon runner and hardcore sneaker hiker was involved, I am
skeptical and prod more details from our friend robert.  He says "well
it is a long hike something like 31 miles, but don't worry about it, I
have a cold and I am out of shape, you will be fine".  I agree to
think about it.  The plan would be to do it on the saturday of fall
circus.

The Fall Circus inevitably comes (I had been avoiding it), and the
topic surges again.  While waiting for Luke to pick me up and being a
good MIT student, I ponder on the hike: alright 31 miles is like 50km,
say you go at a rate of 1 meter per second, it would take 50000
seconds or like 14 hours...hmm, 1 m/s is not too bad, but sustained
for 14 hours...hmm I need a good excuse, this is crazy.  On the drive
out, Luke 'who has the presidential travi under his belt' Sosnowski
all mighty fall circus organizer suggests that we postpone the day
hike until saturday and help out with the Circus.  Robert's wanning
cold corraborates the good idea, and the plan to convince Chrissy to
move the hike for monday starts.  After arriving at camelot on friday
night, Chrissy is positively dissuaded.  At this point I am trying to
concoct a solid argument to get out of this preposterous absurd crazy
idea.  My plan is not working, Robert and Chrissy's persuassion is
stronger than my will power, and still have me hooked onto the idea.
I clearly state for the watching crowd, that I oppose the idea.
Should something happen to Hector 'safety' Briceno, I have an alibi
and I foretold it.

After two stupendous circus days, sunday night comes, and I have not
manage to bail out yet.  Elron 'FLG fountain drink winch' Yellin is my
last option.  He is staying at Camelot sunday night also, I figure
there must be a way I can ride out with him on my two feet, rather
than been ride out by Robert and Chrissy without my two feet.  Still,
everything goes on normally.  Sunday night, we go to the supermarket
to buy all the food essentials.  Robert and Chrissy being professional
hikers go for a Chocolate Chip Cookies Dinner (I still can believe
that is what they had for dinner) with the added benefit of having the
leftovers of these powerful energy boosters for the hike.  I not yet
figure out how I was going to bail, decided to devour as much food and
energy as possible, two instant raman noodle soups, one can of tuna, a
bagel, and one column of ritz crackers.  For the hike, Chrissy chooses
her traditional Gold Fish crackers, she goes for a whopping two
bags!!!.  Robert goes for something like 5 KitKats, 5 Granola Bars
(which he later finds out does not like as much as he thought), and of
course a couple of wrapped energy boosters.  I after examining the
different weight and Daily Recommended Allowances of a plethora of
crackers and cookies like Oreo's, Pop Tarts, Ritz, Chocolate among
others, settle with two rolls of Ritz (which have in addition to
calories, salts) and 100 slices of pepperoni.  I add a powerbar and a
hershey bar as additional food safety margin.

At night, while eating packing goes on.  I being scared out of my
mind, and not being able to come up with a way to bail out, decide to
pack ultralight.  For the people who know me, I have yet to master the
ultralight packing techniques, ultralight for me, means bring a crazy
creek chair instead of a walmart chair; bring a 2 person tent for me,
instead of a four person tent; bring a 9" bw tv instead of a 13" tv.
This time, I really thought of everything out.  My big issue was
whether to bring fleece windstopper gloves or polypro gloves? (the
weight difference was probably 1 ounce if that) [luckly in this case I
was convinced to bring the 'heavier' fleece gloves which proved to be
really handy].  The rest of packing consisted of a camelback, 2 qt
water bladder, polypro long sleeve top, space blanket (part of the
safety in Hector 'safety' Briceno), food.  Althought I strived and
actually felt I had packed lighter than the rest, Chrissy popped my
bubble when I lifted her backpack (I really thought I had packed the
lightest!! is not fair).

Morning came, and the alpine start began.  4am the alarm went off.
5am in the car after a large breakfast and full gear check. 5:50am
trailhead.  As you can tell, I did not manage to bail out.  With
flashlights, we kicked the first few miles of relative flat terrain.
"Ok, I think I can manage this", I said to myself, "the pace of these
guys was like fast walk, but this is not too steep, I should be
alright".  Now the first shocking news on the trip comes 2 hours into
the hike, when I overhear Robert and Chrissy in the front talking
about triathlons..."Hey guys what are you talking about" I interject.
Chrissy replies "Oh, Robert use to run triathlons when he was
younger".  That is when I felt betrayed and back stabbed.  So I
thought, "ok Chrissy is a super runner, but Robert looks a little like
me, it should be alright", now I find out that Robert and Chrissy are
neck to neck.  On the discussion of endurance we formulate a unit of
strengh called a Chrissy (C); Robert qualifies himself as 0.8 C.  I
think he is somewhere in between 0.9 C and 1.1 C.  I by the end of the
trip become a Chrissy certified 0.8 C (good for me).  Furthermore, to
make matters worse, I also find that Chrissy used to pick up boulders
and carry them around her backyard in her early Pennsilvania homey
days.  The lesson for you readers, is to ask few basic questions to
your hiking partners like: "do you run marathons? how many 5-minute
miles have you don? do you do triathlons? do you enjoy carrying heavy
boulders?."  I was naive and actually unaware that these might have
been good questions to ask before the hike.

At the pace they were setting, and I was following without whinning (I
mean how can I whine if they are 40 feet ahead of me!!), we passed Mt
Flume [1-7:50a-5.6mi], Mt Liberty [2-8:20a-6.7mi], Little Haystack
[9:20a-8.8mi] (I don't even recall going by it), and reached Mt
Lincoln [3-9.2mi] by 9:30a.  Ok, now remind me again why are we doing
this in the fall? my arm was frozen due to the wind even having a
shell jacket.  I put on my long sleeve polypro, it helps.  I grin at
some people near us saying "How silly of my to bring shorts", I think
to myself "Yeap, you got to be pretty silly to bring shorts above
treeline".  Well, not much time to think, being part of the MITOC
Presidio team, means we dont f... around, three minutes of rest and we
keep going (this is all a little game used to get the adrenaline going
and somehow rationalize the hike, but it is pretty fun to play).

We push to Mt LaFayette [4-10:00a-10.5mi], this is a long exposed
region, and I really wished I was heavier.  The wind really picks me
up.  I get concerned, because at every flat piece of terrain, the pace
goes from a fast walk, to a light jog (these damn runners!!).  Oh
well, I follow without complaining (in some masochistic way I am
actually enjoying it).  Soon we go below the tree line, and the wind
stops.  We bump into other hikers.  Interestingly (a nice word to be
polite) a woman asks about the fastest or easiest way to get down.
She does not seem to have a map, and seems to belong to a group of two
other hikers one minute up the trail.  Robert resourceful on the area
gives her some advice, but the truth is that the road is pretty far
from where we are.  At this point we have probably covered something
like 12 miles or so.  We hit Garfield Pond, I do not reach the shore
of it, since it is very muddy, and my old tennis sneakers are not
waterproof (unlike my other team members, lucky...).  We then climb up
a bit and reach Mt Garfield [5-11:50a-14mi].  Our effort is rewarded
by an vast view of the pemiwasset wilderness.  We can see at a far
distance where we are coming from, but less encouraging, a much
greater distance of where we have to go.  We have only covered 14
miles, a little over a third of the distance.  We take our first 10
minute break here; I whip out my pepperonis (now, now no bad thoughts
here) and have them with the Ritz crackers.

The next section takes us through a deep saddle, to go back up to Mt
Galehead.  Whoever designs these mountains, why can't they just make
the saddles very shallow, why do they have to be so big between
peaks!!.  I need to talk this Grand Designer...  We proceed to ascend
a steep trail to Gale hut.  Here, is when I am realizing that these
guys are animals, they chug along like nothing; I start my breathing
exercises.  We reach the being renovated gale hut, fortunately greeted
with a large cooler with water (we were counting on good water being
found here).  We drop our packs (or for me the little yellow thing in
my back), and do a quick one hour round trip to Mt Galehead
[6-1:50p-17.6mi].  Now, here is the most depressing summit I have been
to.  When you reach it, there is a small puny cairn (if you can call 4
or 5 rocks a cairn) surrounded not by a gorgeous vista like all
summits, but rather by some small pine trees and no views.  Luckily,
the outlook on the way down makes up for the depressing (or rather
covered) summit.

Now we are now greeted by the crux of the hike.  The ascend to South
Twin.  Its summit would mark the brain branded 18.9 mile of the trip.
>From the beginning we are certain that if we can make it there, we'll
be fine.  I have avoided leads in the trip, so that I can lead this
section, as for them not to kill me if they go up at their pace.  The
trail is 0.9 miles, 1150 feet elevation gain we have to do, and very
steep, theoretically we are tired (Chrissy had done this trail in the
reverse direction and dreaded going up it).  I start a little too fast
and soon I am running out of steam; fortunately Chrissy says "Hey if
you guys want to rest a bit that is fine with me", faster than
Superman (than a flying bullet) I agree and come to halt.  After
catching my breath, I restart the ascend at a somewhat slower but
sustainable pace with a rhythmic breathing.  Impressively and to my
suprise we reached the summit of South Twin [7-2:40p-18.9mi] in 28 minutes
from that point.  It is 2:40pm, we still have 17.2 miles to go!!

We rejoice and are pleased of having come so far.  The rest of the way
is mostly downhill, except that we need to detour to North Twin, since
Chrissy has not ticked this four thousander.  Since we are her friends
we comply to her request (if she wasn't it would have been so easy to
say no).  One hiker asks us "where we were yesterday" and is suprised
to hear "Oh no, we started from Lincoln Woods this morning".  We leave
our packs and quickly take a one hour RT peek at North Twin
[8-3:20p-20.2mi].  Ahh, Chrissy is very pleased, she can tick one more
mountain in her list of four thousanders (for me, almost all peaks
that we are doing are new).  Back at South Twin [3:50p], Chrissy
cracks her Gold Fish bags open, now it is when she is warmed up and
ready to start hiking.  Mt Guyot [9-4:50p-23.5mi] is next, the wind
makes its appearance again.  It proves nothing for Chrissy and Robert
'goat hopping' Zeithammer, for me it reminds me of my days in
Antartica (I have never been there, but it must be very similar).  I
quick picture of the summit, allows us to move on.  Mt Bond follows;
of course this would be the normal path, except for the second detour,
Mt. West Bond [10-5:10p-24.2mi].  All in all, we are doing like 5
miles of detours, these people can't get enough!!!.  The side trip is
worh it, the views afforded by the summit are splendid.  On the return
from the detour, we take a little breather at Mt. Bond [11-6:00p-25.8mi].

We reach Mt. Bondcliff [12-6:30p-27mi], the last summit of the trip a
little before sunset.  The red sun rays cast a magic shadow on the
wilderness, as if we had timed this almost mystical event.  The
Bondcliff trail sometimes comes to the edge of the cliffs, so if you
suffer from vertigo be on watch (or if you are a climber, maybe come
in winter for some ice climbing).  The night befalls on us, and time
comes to whip out the head lamps.  We still have 9 miles before we can
call it a day.  The watching crowd wonders if MITOC Presidio will make
it back by midnight.  Mr Roberts scoffs at the idea, and dismisses it
by saying "of course we will, no problem."

The descend is tedious and long.  The use of flash-lights and gentle
slope slow us down.  Every 20 minutes I question if we are in the
right trail or not.  After two hours or so, we reach the basin.  We
are practically safe except for the last 4.7 flat miles.  Chrissy
flashlight dies, and she leeches off Robert's head lamp.  Robert
enjoys how he can orchestrate Chrissy by shinning his headlamp in the
direction he wants her to go.  At this point, I was not going to go
into autopilot, if it wasn't for the monotonous night scenery, I can
only think of two images from those miles: one - a wide flat trail;
two - a wide flat trail with mud.  On the latter, the autopilot choose
the path of least resistance, or shortest distance between two points,
i.e. a straight line, mud or no mud.  At one point, just for the heck
of it I asked Chrissy if she was tired, and she replies "Mentally I am
a bit tired, my feet are burning, but my legs are fine."  Can you say
Energizer!!

Eureka, at 9:55p we cross the final bridge, and Robert and I sprint to
the car.  He beats me because he knew the way (or at least this is a
good excuse for me).  I remind him that he left Chrissy lightless!!.
On his way back, Chrissy enters the parking lot after following in
pitch darkness the wooden rails.

After celebrating the fact that we are (or rather I am) alive.  I was
very impressed by the fact that Chrissy was able to drive back to
Camelot reasonably well after a 36.1 mile 16 hour 9000ft elev gain
hike .  Initially I assigned myself the task to watch out for the
road, I even said "BEEP" twice as she crossed the shoulder line; but
sleep was stronger.  I didn't think I was tired or unalert, until I
woke up from my sleep, looking a the pitch black dashboard of the car,
and starting to scream "Chrissy, Chrissy!! you are driving without
lights, with the lights off!!!"  After the panic, I raise my chin to
realize that I a little confused, and that everything was ok.

We had dinner at the pizza place in Plymouth, and headed back to
Camelot.  The next day, we had a pleasant breakfast at the Overflow.
Thinking that is was named for a place that people go when other
places are full, I realized from the flooding pictures of the town
where the name originates. 

So in retrospect, all went well.  I bagged a bunch of summits, enjoyed
marvelous vistas and had a good time in the company of friends,

Hector 'Safety' Briceno

PS: Thanks for Robert 'the statistician' for computing all the times
and mileage in a pretty Excel spreadsheet.  

