From: "Hector Briceno" <hbriceno@MIT.EDU>
Subject: Trip Report: Mt Tecumseh 1/8/2000
Date: Mon, 10 Jan 2000 16:37:21 -0800

Mt. Tecumseh, January 8th, 2000
Hikers: Matt, Ken, Catelan, Merrit, Alexis, Jonah, Dmitry,
Alea, Linda, Adam, Alex, Paul, Chrissy, Hector...

It all started at 6:00am when Chrissy said "Hector Wake up, time to get
ready...".  The night felt like it went really fast.  For the record, nevere
sleep in the kitchen, I made that mistake and was alerted (although not
woken up) when someone enters the kitchen at 5:24am to get some oatmeal
breakfast!!

After one hours everyone was ready and in the cars.  We proceeded by the
standard breakfast stop at Winter School Headquarters (Donkin Donuts).  The
news on TV were uneventful, except for some Golf Swinging techniques (I have
now revised my stroke).  The drive to the trailhead was straight forward,
take 93N to 49E, until you get to Waterville valley ski area, park on the
far right.  You will drive by the trailhead if you drive by the lodge (or
just ask any attendants there).

We started at the trail at 8:43am.  Everyone was well prepared and clothed.
I was happy to see some snow in the ground to make the hike easier.  No one
complained (except me, I had to take that role to make the trip more
eventful - Chrissy was setting the uphill pace).  Except for some crampons
being naughty and self loosening, we did not have any troubles.  Some people
adopted the one foot with crampon and one without technique (the best of
both worlds?). The weather turned out to be great, per my petition.  I was
hiking with just a polypro shirt and fleece, and nylon pants.

The trail was blocked by trees in some sections, I would only guess,
remnants of the big 98 ice storm.

We reached the summit at around 11:45am; had a 30 minute lunch (also a long
break to get people comfortable with re-layering and de-layering).  The
summit afforded us two nice views.  We were back at the lot at 2p.

Overall this is a nice introductory hike, and agreed by the whole group to
be a easy winter hike.  We had 5 or 6 people who this was their first winter
hike.  Their completion certificates will be in the mail soon :-)

The trip was wraped up with a lunch/supper at The Earl of Sandwitch in
Lincoln.

