Trip Report: Presidential Reverse, 1/21/00

Oooh, it's cold outside.  Me, Paul, Simon, Olivera, and Ken acquired
this data firsthand.

We planned to summit Eisenhower, and to that end gathered at MIT at
the slightly ambitious hour of 5am.  A quick check of the
Mt. Washington weather was not encouraging:

Conditions at KMWN on 1/22/2000 at 3:55 AM EST (08:55 GMT)
   Weather: Freezing fog 
      Temp: -26 F (-33 C)        Wind chill: -85 F
  Humidity: 100%                   Dewpoint: -26 F (-33 C)
Visibility: 0.25 mi
      Wind: NW 95 mph gusting to 104

But, the forecast called for "diminishing winds."  Therefore, our
problem could be solved by waiting, taking our time, having a nice
breakfast, and scouting things at the trailhead.  Well, we arrived at
Crawford Notch by 8:30am and were greeted by truly horrific
conditions.  A frigid wind screamed through the notch, creating a
minor ground blizzard in the AMC Hostel parking lot.  Dark clouds
churned over our intended target, and a quick trip to see if the info
center was still open resulted in white patches appearing on one group
member's face.  Full winter gear in the parking lot?  Some packing and
lashing still to be done?  This isn't gonna happen--not here.  The
official leader decided to seek out better options.

"F**k ths s**t" was the actual form of the professional assessment.

We drove around to what we hoped would be the leeward eastern side of
the Presidentials.  Climbing through Pinkham Notch, strong gusts still
managed to impede automotive progress despite clear blue skies.  The
sign for the AMC Pinkham Notch camp lay in ruins (the ~3" steel pole
holding it up had been bent by the wind blast), a victim of stronger
winds the night before.  However, the pack room provided a reasonable
place to gear up and dress for "above treeline" weather.  By 10:30, we
were truly ready to explore and test out our winter skills.

As we climbed the moderate grades of the Tuckerman Ravine Trail, the
wind screamed at us from above the treetops.  Pine needles and various
plant detritus showered us with each blast.  However, in the woods the
temperatures were above zero and the wind was effectively blocked.  We
climbed higher, and then detoured to the Sherburne for self-arrest
practice.  Everyone had a chance to roll in the snow and make several
successful arrests.  A lesson was learned, though, when a few folks
tried running leaps to start their slides: once you're up to speed, a
self-arrest roll can quickly turn into an out-of-control tumble.  You
don't have much time to get it under control!

We climbed higher above the notch, where the roar of the wind became
louder and a grey haze obscured the sun.  Huge lenticular clouds
hovered overhead, and dark streamers poured off nearby summits.  We
arrived at Hermit Lake, and caught the full force of the gale just
crossing the small clearing.  We retreated to the safety of the
caretaker's cabin for lunch, and watched as the wind gauge bounced
between 25 and 85 mph.  The ranger's forecast for the day discouraged
above-treeline travel, and as a second thought, mentioned that
below-treeline travel wasn't a very good idea, either.

But, we suited up in our arctic best and journeyed out into the storm
just to see what it was like.  We didn't get far.  I took a first step
out of the shelter of HoJo's porch and was immediately knocked
sideways by a surprise wind gust.  The short path to the views at the
base of Hillman Highway, as flat as a ski trail during the spring, was
a rock garden filled with knee-deep drifts and undermined snow.
Everyone had some problem with a cold body part or uncooperative gear.
This was not fun, even when we paused to figure out the wind chill
(somewhere between -70F and -90F, depending on the instantaneous wind
conditions).

By the way, checking conditions later on, the weather over our heads
was: 

Conditions at KMWN on 1/22/2000 at 12:45 PM EST (17:45 GMT)
   Weather: Freezing fog 
      Temp: -23 F (-31 C)        Wind chill: -81 F
  Humidity: 100%                   Dewpoint: -23 F (-31 C)
Visibility: 0.062 mi
      Wind: NW 93 mph gusting to 107

Needless to say, abandoning further above-treeline fun was a wise
choice.  We retreated down the TR trail in full winter gear, and
didn't need to remove any of it until the lower half of the trail. 

Valley conditions were only marginally better when we reached the
trailhead, but a dinner at Elvio's made everyone feel warm and happy
once again.  Thanks to everyone for their patience and stamina!  In
the future, we'll sleep in on days like this.

-Matt
http://www.mit.edu/~reagan/outdoor.html
