Mt. Eisenhower, January 29, 2000
--------------------------------

If at first you get your ass kicked, go back for more!  The original
Eisenhower excursion had been beaten back in the parking lot due to
high winds and brutal temperatures, but clearing skies and diminishing
winds suggested that we try again.  On a last-minute plan, Simon,
Paul, the Octopus, and I decided to go for it again, this time doing a
9 mile, 3000' trip up the Crawford Path via Pierce from US302.

NOTE: The Mt. Clinton Rd. and Base Rd. are plowed and maintained, but
gated and closed to public use.

We followed last Saturday's schedule, leaving Boston at 5:30am and
stopping for a quick breakfast in Lincoln.  We were on the trail by
8:45, and the clear skies, bright sun, and positive temperatures made
it feel practically tropical after two weeks of subzero hell.  We
chugged up the Connector and the Crawford Path, reaching treeline
below Mt. Pierce in about two hours.  We donned our above-treeline
best and turned the corner to see an absolutely incredible view of
Eisenhower, Monroe, Washington, and Jefferson shining brightly below a
deep blue sky.  This is what we were looking for!  The warm sun
propelled us up Pierce, where Simon, Paul, and the Octopus tagged a
new summit.  Hoping to hit our final destination early, we charged
down the exposed summit cone and headed across the scrubby, exposed
ridge.

We donned snowshoes after deep snowdrifts gave us a little trouble in
the shrubbery.  A few people were ahead of us, but the trail was only
partially packed and we took the time to stomp out a nice even track
for other hikers and for our own return.  The trail wound in and out
of the scrub, with amazing views opening up at each corner.  Soon, we
were ascending the south flank of Eisenhower, venting jackets to
prevent overheating on the wind-shadowed ridge.  

We passed the other hikers at the Eisenhower summit loop trail
junction, and took up the task of actually breaking trail up the
summit cone.  This was a lot of work, but our snowshoes did a great
job as the terrain went from deep powder to ice and hardpack.  A few
exposed steep sections suggested that last week's self-arrest practice
was a good idea, but overall it was a moderate yet interesting ascent.
The wind picked up considerably as we approached the summit, and we
were greeted by both better views and higher gusts (an "average" 40
mph) as we hit the summit.  A few pictures, some congratulations, and
down we went.

A quick lunch in a sunny, sheltered area fueled us up for the return
trip.  The well-packed trail was fast and easy, now, and we returned
to Pierce and the treeline rather quickly.  Packing our snowshoes, we
sailed down the Crawford Path and reached the trailhead by 3:45.
Managed two rounds before the Woodstock Station happy hour expired at
5pm!

All in all, a fantastic day.  I can't wait to see the photos!

-Matt

