Trip report: Pemigewasset Wilderness, Jan 21-23
Participants: Rob Jagnow and the Katahdin 2000 Team (Bill Finger, Mike
"Strawberry" Freedman, Hector "Safety" Briceno, and Robert Zeithammer)

Plan: Full-gear rehearsal for the Katahdin expedition, special focus on
testing:
1) longer-term sustainability of our winter camping technique (double
overnight)
2) XC skiing with our new gear-carrying sleds

Chronology: Start from Lincoln Woods on Friday evening, travel at night to
Franconia Falls and set up camp. On Saturday, move on to Bondcliff Trail,
set up camp, and ascend the mountain. Sunday: return back to Lincoln Woods.
As many of you know, this is not the most exciting or scenic route, so I
will not dwell on describing its details. If you've never been there,
imagine a snow-covered, fairly flat, and totally straight old railroad bed
that stretches in front of you all the way to the point where its parallel
sides intersect. To make XCski travel with a rigid-harness sled more
exciting, the trail is lightly sprinkled with blown-down trees. The only
interesting sight along the whole route are Franconia Falls - showing only
two pools of bubbling water through their thick icy coat.

Instead of going through the weekend and describing what did we do when, I
will focus on the lessons we learned about expedition-style winter travel:

1) While the name Turbo-Boggan written in flashy colors all over our fine
Toys'r-Us-certified expedition sleds suggests a formidable vehicle, the
most important thing we learned was: never buy sleds with missile-control,
turbo-rockets, and an eject button on the pilot console for your
expedition. By the end of the weekend, two out of our four sleek machines
were shredded to pieces, Mike even ended up dragging all his stuff simply
wrapped in a tarp... OK, I admit, we could have known better beforehand.
But it took over two days to find even the Turbo-Boggans in Boston three
days after a major snowstorm caused a run on sleds throughout all toy
stores and K-marts...

2) Packing up and setting up a winter camp takes twice longer than the same
thing in the summer - count of at least two hours. This, together with our
Friday midnight bedtime, was the major reason why we had to turn around
halfway up Bondcliff, prompted by who else but Hector "Safety" Briceno. Oh
well, all of us have been there before anyway, and the winds that day would
probably have blown us off the mountain anyway.

3) Blowdowns slow down travel. Let me rephrase: blowdowns completely
destroy the group's ability to move  ahead... Just imagine trying to
maneuver a sled that tips ALL THE TIME with an 8-ft. long rigid harness off
trail through the Pemi. FYI: even without blowdowns, we were only able to
do about 2 miles an hour. This caused a major panic in light of the
upcoming uphill 12-mile ski-in at Katahdin only days away... Stay tuned for
a thorough trip-report about how that ended up working out.

4) When temperatures drop to -15 F at night, the best thing to do in the
morning is to halt all the packing and cooking, and go for a brisk
15-minute walk. This will dramatically increase the number of toes actually
consciously accounted for by the central nervous system. But, interestingly
enough, even when the temperatures drop that low, the new MITOC 0-degree
bags will get you through the night, perhaps with a help of an extra
fleece. But please don't just quote me on this, try it yourself before
taking off for that month-long trip top Alaska with just a 0-degree bag...

5) The vegetarian pizza at Elvios in Lincoln is simply NOT GOOD. Do not go
there...

6) Little Motorola TalkAbout radios can go a long way! But more on that in
a special report bellow:

*****************************************************************

A special report on the benefits of radio communication and good old MITOC
teamwork

As the heavy darkness of a cold night surrounded our Bondcliff camp and the
temperature fell way bellow zero, all of us were trying to quickly finish
up cooking and head for bed. The anticipation of being able to feel our
toes again once we would bundle up in our sleeping bags was fueling the
effort. Rob tried to make us appreciate the glowing Saturn in the sky
above, but our need for warmth was more pressing. Given the bitter cold, we
concluded that Luke's moonlight XC skiing adventure was scratched... 

But then, as if from the distant bright stars overhead, our radios received
a crackling message: "This is Luke, we are near the bridge, please come
in". We rushed to reply: "This is Alpha Base, calling Gamma Luke. We read
you loud and clear". The preparations for sleeping abruptly stopped, and
within minutes, the fearless Beta Team (the two Roberts) was on its way to
meet the visitors. "This is Alpha Base calling Gamma Luke, please state
your position". "We are somewhere near the bridge, we might have passed
it...." was the reply. By now, the Beta Team was flying upstream through
the dark forest at full speed towards the suspension bridge across the
Pemigewasset River. The comparative ease of skiing without 40-pound sleds
strengthened our arms and prolonged our glide. Within minutes, we were able
to report "This is Beta Team calling Alpha Base. We have reached the
suspension bridge, and there is no trace of Gamma Luke". "That's correct,
we are not at the bridge yet, I am worried that we might have passed it"
was Gamma Luke's reply. At this point, the Beta Team crossed the bridge and
studied both the map and ski tracks in the snow carefully. The moon shined
through the trees just above the horizon at this point, and was mistaken
interchangeably for either Luke's headlamp or a seriously Blair-Witch
mystery deep in the hostile woods. Having found tracks of only one skier
from the direction we were expecting Luke's seven intrepid skiers, we
concluded that they were victims of the well-known "summit feeling" that is
perceived by everyone on a long seemingly endless trail: About half way to
the summit/goal, one feels he MUST be almost there. Three quarters of the
way, this feeling turns into "we must have passed it or something!!"
encroaching desperation. Using radio-contact, we calmed the skiers down and
quickly set out downstream to meet them. 

By now, Alpha Base was getting tired of waiting for overdue visitors, and
in response to our "This is Beta team calling Alpha Base, expect us in
about 40 minutes and make us hot drinks, please!!", we only heard "That is
a negative, we are headed for our sleeping bags". Soon after that, Alpha
Base stopped replying to our demands completely, faking bad reception of
the signal... :-| At the junction of Cedar Brook Trail and East Branch
Road, we finally met with Gamma Luke and his brave group. With the
almost-full moon finally above the horizon, the forest emerged from the
darkness in a glistening silver gown, and skiing became sheer joy. Within
about half an hour, all of us have reached Alpha Base, shared a Nalgene
Bottle of hot cocoa, and stood around chatting until our toes got cold
again. That was a signal for Gamma Luke's party to press on, and for the
Beta Team to burrow into our sleeping bags. "This is Beta Team calling
Gamma Luke. It was nice to see you, have a safe trip back!".

Special thanks to Matt Reagan for lending his TalkAbout radio to the
Pemigewasset Trip.
