Mt Katahdin, Baxter State Park, Maine. Trip Report, January 25-31, 2000: 

Bill 'I wont sleep in a snow cave' Finger, Mike 'strawberry' Friedman, 
Robert 'wipe the cream cheese off the knife' Zeithammer, and 
Hector 'safety' Briceno

UPFRONT AMERICAN DISCLAIMER: This was not an official MITOC trip
(although all participants are or have been trip leaders).  This is
not an undertaking to take lightly.  It is required to have previous
winter experience before such endeavor.  We are not responsible for
any actions, opinions, suggestions, innuendoes, data, information,
statistics taken from this report that causes any adverse conditions
onto yourself or others.


First the short version of the trip report: A group of us wanted to go
to Katahdin, Maine.  We got a permit.  Drove up on Tuesday January
25th; summitted Katahdin at 1pm on Friday January 28th; and summitted
Pamola Peak at 10:30am on Saturday.  Were back in Boston on Monday at
4:30pm.

Now a more elaborate version of our adventure:
(you can find this trip report and more information (pictures) in 
http://graphics.lcs.mit.edu/~hbriceno/climb/katahdin2000)

It all started sometime ago, when we toyed with the idea of doing a
long committing winter trip.  A group of us had been in Katahdin in
the summer of 1998.  Pat Brown and I thought that the logical choice
for New England was a winter ascent of Mount Katahdin...  

The group slowly took shape and the interested parties went on trips
together.  Initially we had consolidated a group of 6 strong hikers,
but in the end two would not be able to make it due to pressing
commitments.  Pat was also going to come, but a sickness prevented him
being in shape in time for the trip.  This state park is different
from most state parks in that during winter, a permit has to be
obtained.  Additionally the distance from civilization, (one FULL day)
makes self rescue mandatory.  For this reason, they required a minimum
group size of 4 and some proof (hiking/climbing resume) of winter
experience.  Incidentally the park recommends to gather a group of 6
just in case 2 people cannot make it (they were right on the dot).

The group was formed.  It would be Bill "I wont sleep in a snow cave"
Finger, Robert "could you wipe the cream cheese of the knife"
Zeithammer, Mike "Strawberry" Freedman, and yours truly Hector
"Safety" Briceno.  Gamma Luke Sosnowski and Chrissy "Marathon Runner"
Guth would not be able to join us.

Since this was more than a day hike, we took this trip seriously and
decided to due a multitude of winter hikes including overnights to
prepare.  I will not go into details of this trip, except that the
weekend before our departure, we did a double overnight trip to test
the sleeping system (double bag system, which I would rate good, down
to -30F), and one of the most important and key pieces of gear for the
trip: The Sleds.  This hike into the Pemigewasset, ruled out the
Turbo-boggans as our cargo vehicles for the long approach, making us
scramble for a replacement.  At last the Pelican-boggans would
suffice.  Another important detail to point out, is that it is crucial
that team members be socially compatible, since we would be spending 5
days together, and nights can sometimes be long.  Luckily have grown
to understand the way the Czech mind of Robert works, the quirks and
perks of Mr. Friedman and the humor and entertainment that Se~or
Finger provides.  (I can say from the outside, that the other team
members were not apparently displeased with the ways of Monsieur
Briceno, he can be sometimes annoying, pathetic, etc...(and God, those
bad jokes).

DAY 0: The Drive Up

The day of departure came.  We packed the cars to the rim and started
the pilgrimage to Millinocket, Maine.  A few days before, I had reserved
a room to crash in at night, sort out the gear, and pack the sleds.  I
recommend this option since it gives you full confidence that
everything will be packed, and gives you a chance to double check on
gear.  The alternative option (which we might use another year); is to
do the full gear check and pack the sleds in Boston, drive up, and
bivy at the parking lot.

The drive up proved to be very long.  Under optimal conditions, the
drive to Millinocket Maine from Boston is 5.5 hours (340some miles);
We were greeted by a snowstorm that made that drive rag on for about 8
hours. We almost lost two of our members.  Since Robert needed to pick up
his gear at home; Mike and I in one car were going to wait for Bill and
Robert at the first government sponsored highway stop (rest area, liquor
store or toll booth) in New Hampshire.  Mike and I arrived at the first rest
stop in New Hampshire (which coincidentally is right on the state
line, so this is actually a good place to meet on I95; for the record,
there is a liquor store and a tollbooth few miles down).  They were
one hour late due to the closing of Route 1. I had worried because
Mike and I had just seen a car on the opposite direction splash into
the median. This was going to be a winter trip in all respects.

Our next stop was for gas; in addition to gas, we obtained 
one crucial piece of mountaineering gear: THE MUG.  For just two
American dollars we acquired "Mr. Mikes" insulated mugs with a free fill of
coffee or soda.  These Mugs being of 16 ounces capacity, with a lid that
can be easily opened and closed, are vastly superior to the meager 12
ounces of the REI mugs that some of us (I) had.  I strongly recommend a
high capacity Mug as a winter eating container; as it is well-known, plates
or bowls do not fare well in the winter since food goes cold at a very
rapid pace due to the higher surface area exposed to the wind in
comparison to mugs.

We arrived at the Big Moose Inn at around 10pm.  I love Rural America:
I had made the reservation (basically gave them my name) two days
before. I called them up from Burger King on the way up, telling them
that we were going to be late, they said alright, and gave me
directions to the cabin were we would be staying.  The night we
arrived, I knocked on their door and met Bruce (the inn keeper), and
he just showed me to the cabin.  We stayed there, and the next day
just paid cash; we never signed anything nor checked any ID!!!

The amount of snowfall and ice-cold conditions made our thoughts of
the next day 12 mile cross-country ski-in terrifying.  The first thing
our snow expert Robert did as soon as he got off the car was to
touch, feel, grate, smell, and sense the snow; he turned around
and did not look too thrilled; we were in denial.  Would we have to
ski on deep snow with a thin layer of ice crust on the surface?  Bruce
mentioned to us, that rangers go up the road (that we would ski on)
and groom the trails every so often with snowmobiles. With this
information we decided to move our alpine start from being at the
trail head at 7am to 9am.

In the cabin, we unpacked everything, repacked all the food.  I was
actually impressed with all the group gear we had.  96 pounds in all:
18 in tents (2 normal 2 person tents, and one small tent for day trips
as a bivy shelter), 33 food, 21 fuel, 7 stoves+pots, 15 in small
climbing gear (just in case we did knife edge or some ice climbing), 2
for the shovel (very convenient) plus miscellaneous.  We packed the
sleds.  Robert, although not holding an engineering degree, I must
say, had the best packing and design technique.  His sled looked very
trimmed (it boggles my mind how he managed to obtain no bulky group
items...).  Mike,  on the other hand, got the short stick.  His sled
looked like Mad Dog from Backpacker magazine, with a bunch of big stuff
strapped onto it.  His sled must have been two stories high.  I
thought I had my sled well packed; but I was proven wrong on the first
500 feet of the ski in.

DAY 1: The ski in

The comfort of the cabin allowed us (or at least that was one of the
motivations for staying at a heated shelter rather than bivying at the
parking lot) to get out of bed early.  A last wholesome civilized
breakfast ensued.  Robert, being somewhat perky impressed us when he
borrowed a knife from Mike and said "would you please remove the cream
cheese from the knife?".  Here we were few hours from violating all health
codes for 5 days, and Robert was picky about the knife!!!.  The
drive to the trailhead was short, we drove up the Golden Road
(parallel to Millinocket Road) for about 8 miles.  On the left side of
the road, there was a huge parking lot, with a minivan already parked on
it. Having learned from previous trips, I parked as close to the road as
possible (in case of snow) next to the minivan.  Bill, on the other
hand, drove straight off the plowed area.  Noticing that he
was stuck but parked ok, we unpacked knowing that on the return we
would have to dig him out.

After dropping the sled, and testing the skiing conditions, we were
greeted by the sound of a snowmobile.  Generally, snowmobile sounds
are not attractive or entice happiness. This case produced a good
sensation since it would mean that some section of the road would be
plowed. A ranger greeted us, told us that the trail to Tongue Pond
Gate (4 miles) was packed.  There are two ways to approach the
mountain from the south in the winter.  One is via the Tongue Pond
Bridge (the one we did).  You ski in 4 miles (2 miles on a small trail
leading to the summer car road, then 2 miles on the road) to Tongue
Pond Gate, then it is another 8 miles to Roaring Brook from there.
The other option is to have someone snow mobile you directly into
Tongue Pond Gate shaving 4 miles off your trip.

We then proceeded to attach the sleds to our packs or harnesses and
started the ski in at 9:30am.  I was very frustrated because my sled
was like a person that did not like sleeping on his or her back, it
always turned sideways. I was going crazy, luckily, Robert the expert
XC skier, was doing laps and checks on us (It is great to have a
professional skier among us, if at anytime you wanted someone to ski
back or ahead a mile to check on someone else, no one would hesitate
to call on him...). Robert and I redistributed the weight on the
sled.  The important thing is to keep the heaviest items inside the
tub of the sled, this usually means just keeping the pack in the tub.
We then attached the snowshoes to the sides of the sled, providing a
wide but low center of mass lean mean sled (named the red dear).
The most important lesson here is to take your time packing your sled
for the lowest center of gravity and the most compactness.  The first
2 miles of the ski in take you through a cut-off xc ski trail. That
brings you to Tongue Pond Road.  From the road, it is about another 2
miles to Tongue Pond Gate.  We kept together as a group for a while;
unfortunately Bill was having trouble with his sled; at this point the
convenience of carrying the TalkAbout (tm) radios proved useful.  We
split into two groups, but still kept track of each other's progress.
Robert and I reached the gate at 11:45am.  We did not see
anybody on the trail, this is one of the beautiful things of going to
Katahdin in the winter.  The frozen ponds are absolutely beautiful.

Tongue Pond Gate is where the fun ended.  The trail was only broken
in up to here. We would have to break in the remaining 8 miles.  For
the record, the trail is normally broken in by snowmobiles, every few
days, but since we had just arrived after a major snowfall, it had not
been broken in yet (The next day, a ranger met us at roaring brook,
and hence the trail was broken in the next day, chucks had we only
started a day later). At the same time, a virgin trail provides some
benefits no to be had by a used trail.  The view of a naked untouched
wilderness pristine road was amazing. Robert and I started breaking
trail for the benefits of others. The trail is not bad, fairly
flat except for some uphills (of course I could be lying). Overall, it
has about 1300 feet of elevation gain in 8 miles.  The tricky part of
breaking trail is really finding the old packed trail under the snow;
as soon as you diverge from this unseen covered trail one would dip 6
inches in the powder. This is an obvious problem on the downhills.
Although one can steer oneself to a certain section of the trail, the
sled (if rigged with only one connection point) with a mind of its own
will wonder around sometimes dipping into heavy powder and bringing
you to a full stop faster than air breaks.  The opposite case is
equally bad: if the sled does not pull you from behind, it can speed
up faster than you, and since most of us had a single point of attachment
to the sled, namely to the harness haul loop right above the gluteus,
the PVC tubing would tend to probe the deep parts of the inner spirit
if you know what I mean.

At last, we made it to roaring brook at about 5pm; Mike and Bill joined
us at 6pm, they had actually snow shoe some of the steep portions of
the trail (which, in retrospect, is not a bad idea; steep climbing with
XC skis can be tiring and annoying, to only be doing it due to some
stupid ethic or idea that XC skiers don't take off their skis).  As
soon as we got off the skis did we really notice how much snow was on
the ground; the first step was greeted with a "thump", the snow was to
my thigh.  We then proceeded to make camp.  Due to the fact that this
was supposed to be a wilderness trip, we had forgone the use of a lean-to
(that was already set-up) just 10 feet from us!!  We were also rewarded
by running water (literally running water, a stream).  I had expected
that we would have to melt snow all the time, fortunately we found
water sources at roaring brook (the roaring brook itself) and a small
hole at chimney pond.  It was pretty neat being able to hear the
roaring brook, its like those nice nature CDs (oh wait, we were in
nature).  The trip to this brook, which was only 50 feet away, is
another story. It is a 45 degree snow descent and climb...Our campsite
was great.  One of the beautiful things of winter camping is the
possibility to explore the architects within us.  We took time to
carve out a little kitchen, wind protectors, paths, closets, telephone
booths (now I am exaggerating).

One lesson, we learned that day, is the beauty of vapor barriers.  By
putting a plastic bag sandwiched between your liners and insulating
sock, your feet stay warmer during the day.  The principle is that once
the liner is drenched with sweat (70%), the feet will stop sweating,
and the insulating sock will be dry, and hence insulate better.  Some
people even put another plastic bag outside the insulating layer (in
case their XC boots were not fully waterproof, which they were not).  The
only caveat to this is to treat your feet well afterwards
(i.e. massage it a bit, let it breath out into the air for a while).
For the record, try this before under a controlled environment, such
as an overnight hike not far from civilization.

DAY 2: Up to Chimney Pond.

We got plenty of sleep, since this day would be fairly easy.  We would
leave our XC skis at roaring brook, and bring up the sleds to chimney
pond, a 3.3 mile hike with just 1500 feet of elevation gain.  One
thing we learned quickly is that it takes a lot of time to take down a
winter camp.  As Robert said before, it takes about 2 hours.  We got
up around 8 or 9, and really did not start going up until 11am.  It is
important to note, that there are sanitary facilities at this
campsite.  (as well as few other spots along the way, namely the
avalanche campsite and chimney pond).  One of reason that the Park
those not allow people to camp in places outside designated campsites
(barring an injury) is the fact that they don't want any human waste
in the wilderness.  Baxter Park is one of the few parks that operate
in the principle "Preservation before Recreation" (the ranger Steward
would be proud of reading this...)  We'll admit upfront that we took
the wilderness part very seriously and avoided using any unfair means,
but we did use the loos as opposed to doing number twos in the woods
(all of course due to conservation).

Since the trail was packed in by a snow mobile few hours earlier that
morning, we just used our boots with no crampons or snowshoes.  The
hike up to chimney pond is wonderful, it gives you the first few close
panoramas of the mountain. I strongly recommend, taking advantage of
the view points (we almost missed one if it wasn't for the sharp and
sage eyes of one of our team members).  The view of the whole range
was breathtaking.

Dragging the sleds on the flat ground the day before had given a false
sense of weight.  On flat ground you, it does not matter much the
weight one is dragging; but dragging it up a steep incline makes all
that weight come to bear.  I will admit using first gear in many
sections of the climb.  I also tested one of my new gorps to great
pleasing. These are the Ritz Cheese sandwiches, they are great.

We reached chimney pond in 3 hours.  Now, the best view east of the
Rockies is found here, no doubts about it. The breathtaking
paralyzing shocking astonishing jaw-dropping tongue-rolling
mesmerizing spellbinding views of the Mountain and Knife Edge is
impressive, not to be forgotten. If you were only to reach chimney
pond, see this, and head back, the trip would be all worth it!!!.

Well in addition to this, we got to stay two more days.  The first
order of business was to setup camp.  Here is where the shovel came
in handy; there was so much snow to be moved, that we even borrowed
the ranger's shovel.  We probably moved 4 or 5 cubic meters of snow,
to make space for two tents, a spacious kitchen area, and a storage room
among other spaces.  We were pleased to find out that we were the
first people to camp outside in this winter!!! (all others had stayed
in the cabins).

After setting up camp, and cooking dinner, we headed towards the
Ranger's Cabin to discuss the next day's plan.  Unfortunately, the
cabin was heated, and we lost all the cold we had gained during the
day.  You must remember that we are trying to simulate wilderness
conditions to the extreme (for the record, we are thinking for extreme
wilderness experience we can even forgo the tents... more on this
later).  The ranger, Steward, is a very nice guy.  We talked with him
about our plan to go to Baxter Peak (Katahdin) Summit the next day.
We would go up Cathedral trail (very steep), and come down Saddle.  We
would register with him, the equipment and safety gear we were
bringing (2 qts of water, one tent, two sleeping bags, two first aid
kits).  You can also get a better idea of how long things take, and
any recommendations for route discovery.  He agreed with our plans.
We hurried back to the tents to avoid losing more coldness in the
cabin.  We want to avoid as much as possible any external sources of
heat, which would be considered cheating....

DAY 3: First Summit Day

The day started by me saying "Guys is 5 o'clock, get up"..."Guys is
5:15 get up"..."Guys is 5:45 get up" (then Bill responds "you liar,  is
5:30").  This proceeded for a long time.  Our fake alpine start was
delayed by our laziness or cozy sleeping bags (at least for Bill and
I, Mike and Robert were ready 30 minutes before us).  Theoretically we
should have been on the trail at 6 or so am.  We ended up starting at
8am (of course, I had secretly made accounted for this, so we were not
late according to my internal time :-).  One of the difficulties is
that in a two-person tent is difficult for both people to get dress at
the same time.  Bill and I played reverse-strip-poker.  I would say
"Ok Bill, I have my thermal underwear on, now is your turn", "he would
put his on, and then another layer", of course while he is doing this
I am resting or sleeping, "is your turn now", then I would put on a
fleece layer, and raise him a pair of socks.... This went on for 40
minutes until we were dressed.  Then came the boots.  Pretty much only
one person can put on the boots at a time if done at the edge of the
tent (this allowed me to sleep 15 extra minutes!).  We had 4 pop tarts
for breakfast to save the time of cooking.  Before leaving, we hung
our food on the Bear line.  Although bears are (suppose to be) asleep,
there are weasels that would eat your food if left outside.

We checked out at 8am, and donned our snowshoes.  Being the only ones
in the mountain also means that you have to break more trail.  The
first quarter mile is just a flat walk until the beginning of the steep
unrelenting ascent to gain the Cathedral Ridge (1.75 miles and 2500 ft
elevation gain to the summit).  The trail start with a 40-degree snow
climb. Here, we learned the basics of steep snow shoeing.  It is
actually pretty impressive the steepness of things you can snow shoe.
 About and hour or two later we reached the point where snow shoeing was
not necessary and switched to crampons.  Here the memories of my summer
hike up this trail began to come back.  This winter trail requires
some scrambling beyond the usual high-step.  You had to do mantels,
counter pressures, pull ups, stems.  All this while carrying winter
day packs with emergency gear!.  Although overall it was not so bad,
there were only 2 or 3 times where if I had slipped I would have
broken any ones, other than that most falls would have produced cuts
and bruises.

I queried the comfort level of all team members, to make sure they
were comfortable scrambling up this trail.  Fortunately (or so I
think) they would have told me otherwise, if so they felt.  We reached
the upper section of the mountain a little before noon.  This upper
section is not as steep as before; just a little bit more exposed.  At
this point, we all had a full wind ensemble.  Unfortunately, goggles
are very had to keep from fogging (or at least cheap ones).  I
honestly try to keep mine on, but they were fogging so much that I had
taken them off.  Before they fogged, I was barely able to follow just
the broken steps in front of me.  The wind was not bad, perhaps 25 or
less miles per hour steady with gusts of 40 mph.  We pressed on and
finally summitted at 1pm!!!  We had reached the end of the Appalachian
Trail, in full winter conditions.  We had achieved the first half of
our trips objective, so we were happy (the second half, is returning
unscathed).

After only having been at the summit for 5 minutes, we proceeded down.
Reaching the summit is only half of the way.  It is incredible how
fast the wind erases or makes hard to recognize our footprints.  We
walked half a mile on the summit ridge and saddle plateau until we
reached the beginning of saddle trail (from summit down saddle trail
is 2.2 miles, 2500 elev. loss).  This walk is gorgeous because there
are no trees to block your views, and it is really an expanse terrain.
Right before heading down we had some tea.  I have not mentioned one
of the luxuries (or perhaps a real good item) of this trip, was
Robert's Thermos.  It keeps water or tea hot for really LONG periods
of time.  Robert was the trip mom, taking care of us, and feeding us
tea throughout the whole trip.

The beginning of the saddle trail is very impressive, is about a 45-50
degree slope!!.  My first words where "Whoa, we are going to go down
this?" and my second words where "how is everyone's self arrest
technique?"; I will not describe in this trip report the answers
gotten. We proceeded walking down carefully this slope.  Fortunately
for us, there was little avalanche danger as the snow was very firm.
After half way down the saddle, I decided that it was safe to butt
glissade. So I took off my crampons (as it is well known that any
form of glissading with crampons is dangerous to the ankles and
foolish) and finished the steep part of the descent in no time (I
should have started to glissade sooner).

The end of the slide, asked for some route finding for getting back on
the trail (there are no cairns in the 500 feet slide...)  Fortunately
I spotted some broken trail ahead of us (of course Mike has actually
seen a blaze and orange ribbon on a tree some minutes earlier, and
hence secured the sure way to the trail much before me).  We got back
to camp at about 3:20pm.

The nice thing about winter camping are the early dinners and early
bed times.  As soon as we got back, gorging time started.  Although I
was not really tired, I was hungry, I professed to the cook Robert,
what could possibly become one of the trip's quote "I would eat
anything you put in my mouth."  Ahh nothing like gorging after a long
day hike. Dinner was rice and mashed potatoes; this was really a
treat.  The Winter Hiking Cuisine rates it "A wonderful after-hike
meal, to make you lick your fingers", it was delicious (I would say
that no matter what dinner would have been, I still would have found it
delicious).  Curiously, the butter was missing. We could not locate
the butter, although we looked everywhere.  Fortunately we had done
the hard part of the trip.  I would like to point out that butter is
sooo good, you just drop bars of it into your boiling pot, it does
wonders for heat generation and a warm toasty sleep (we pretty much
used a bar or two per day before losing it).

It was time now to plan the next days activities before talking to the
ranger and heading to bed.  The hike had been arduous, but I we had
saved juice for the next day. The views of the classic knife edge
called to me; Robert had also expressed interest.  Mike and Bill were
pleased with the day's success and were not really eager for a long
technical day.  After discussing the options for other hikes and
making sure everyone was happy, we decided for the next day to climb
up to Pamola Peak via the Dudley trail.  The Dudley trail is somewhat
shorter than Cathedral and has a little less elevation gain (1.5
miles, 2000 feet evel. gain); but still is very sustained and steep.
There Robert and I, if conditions were right, would press on over
knife edge; and Mike and Bill would return back to base camp.

The ranger cabin was again warm (actually a little too warm for my
taste); and we sweated a bit.  We brought the plan to the ranger.  The
knife edge is the ridge connecting Pamola Peak to Baxter Peak; it is
really a beautiful ridge. The way I have been recommended of
traversing it, is from Pamola to Baxter, since most of the hike/climb
would be uphill (there is a 300 feet elevation gain from Pamola to
Baxter).  The most difficult part, fortunately, is at the beginning; it
is going from Pamola to Chimney Peak.  These peaks are about 100 feet
a stone throw away from each other, but with a 60 feet notch in
between them.  This notch is semi-technical, some people do it with
rope, and some people without it.  The steepest part is going up to
Chimney.

The first order of business was discussing the technical gear we had
for the climb.  I felt slightly embarrassed since I really just
brought a _tiny_ rock rack and ropes (when I brought the gear I was
really thinking of perhaps doing some ice top roping).  The ranger was
somewhat hesitant, but approved the idea assuming we used good
judgment, and added some pointers on ways of protecting the route with
natural gear (like draping the rope over rocks such that rocks could
catch the rope on a fall).  Additionally the ranger considering that
the knife edge is a technical plan, okayed the two two-person team
plans.  I it my impression that they prefer four people groups for
hiking, and allow two person groups for technical climbs (for safety
reasons since a two person team is faster).  The next order of
business is setting up estimated departure and turn around times.  I
think this is very important to set at the beginning and to stick to
them.  It really gives you a foolproof deterministic way to make
trips somewhat safer.  For administrative purposes we divided into two
groups, Team A: Mike and Bill; and Team B: Robert and Hector.  We made a
commitment time for knife edge of 11am, that is by that time we
would decide to go for it or not; and turn around time of 1pm if we
did not reach Pamola. In addition to planning our last day's climb,
we also got the scoop on P&P, park and policy.  We then retreated back
to our artificial shelters, for the next day's alpine start.

DAY 4: Second Summit Day

This time we got closer to alpine start.  We woke up at 4 or 5.  And
were actually on the trail at 6:30am.  What I learned is that you have
to suck it up, and just get dressed in one short push, as opposed to
little bit and pieces.  I will admit that I was not too thrilled by
the previous day 4 pop tart alpine breakfast.  I mean I think pop
tarts are great for winter (expedition proven), but you can only have
so much.  I had mini bagels and pepperoni for breakfast (I had to
sleep with the bagels in order to keep them warm for the next day).
The preparations ran smoothly, I think in part that we had most of the
gear already packed from the day before.

Snowshoes proved invaluable again.  The Dudley trail was not broken
in (I think only two people had gone up in the winter before us), and
the snow was deep.  Again we impressed ourselves with the technical
snow shoeing - using the snow shoe's claws on rocks, stemming...For
this hike, steep snow shoe climbing is crucial for the first third of
the hike.  The trail follows the ridge leading up to Pamola.  Once you
leave the tree line, the trail is very aesthetic; reaching the ridge
is so hypnotizing... one knows that once the ridge is reached, the
rest of the hike would be on easier, thinner, packed snow; rather than
the deep puffy powder snow at the basin.  Slowly we make progress and
reach the ridge in 30 minutes or so.  Ahh, rest at last.  We donned
our crampons and leave the snowshoes here.  Should Robert and I decide
to do knife edge, then Mike and Bill would carry our snow shoes back
to camp (I really like this idea, because going down the Saddle trail
would be so much easier than going down this trail).

The trail was more or less what we expected, rocky, steep, and snowy.
Although it had some surprises.  At one point Bill decided to search
his own way between blazes, little did he know we would be stepping
into a huge hole.  Suddenly, he was waist-deep into snow, with his
legs on hard snow.  He pleaded for help "Hector do not leave me
here...".  I proceeded to help him... no actually not really,
realizing that he did not have any emergency gear (I had the emergency
sleeping bag), and his gorp mix was alright... I decided to avoid the
snow trap and use the Army technique to get around him and towards the
next blaze; I would pretty much swim on top of the snow (and hence
maximize my surface contact).  Bill, as expected, freed himself in few
minutes and carried on.  The use of radios, clear skies, and direct
line of sight visibility of each other allowed each other to move at
our own pace.  Secretly, Robert and I were concerned about making it
to the summit by 11am, otherwise we would not commit to the knife edge
traverse.

We reached the beautiful summit of Pamola at 10:30am.  It is a true
summit; unlike Baxter which is somewhat rounded summit, Pamola is
steep and sharp until the end.  The clear skies provided an unmatched
panorama.  I actually recall the ranger saying that in terms of
visible area, Katahdin provides the maximum visible area in the lower
48 (Denali has more).  The wind had picked up a bit.  Robert and I
decided to take a look at chimney peak and the notch in between.  I at
one point took off my gloves to fumble with some gear, and was greeted
by a gust that picked up a lot of snow.  The temperature was great is
was 30.  But this also meant that the snow was warm.  I quickly got
freezing water snow on my hands.  This made me scream "Aoh Aoh Aoh
Aoh, hands freezing cold Aoh..." Ok I decided to put on my full arctic
attire, and went back to look.  This time prepared (at least weather
wise).  The steep wall on the other side to chimney peak looked steep,
and my tiny weenie rack seemed barely adequate.  Luckily a gust of
high wind, made the decision of forgoing the traverse easier.  To
convince myself, I did the one leg test; I was not able to stand for
long on one leg.  Without hesitation the "no go" decision was agreed
between Robert and I.

At this time, it was getting cold, we had been at the summit for about
30 minutes.  We all proceeded down the summit together.  The sunlight
cast our long shadows on the land.  A rock christened index rock,
because it was very protuberant and noticeable, provided the backdrop
for some award winning photography.  Robert was feeling pretty good,
and even did some posing for an European eyewear company.  Undoubtedly
the release of those photographs will bring paparazzi to MIT campus.
Finally we reached the point were we had left the snowshoes.  I
feeling the young Hector inside of me, decided not to wear the snow
shoes and butt glissade the way down.  This turned out to be really
fun, except that the downhill took sharp turns, which I did not take
(did I mention that pine trees smell great?).  We were all pretty much
down by 1pm.

It was very strange being down so early, almost as if we had a rest
day.  We did not know what to do.  Well, being one o'clock means lunch
time!! we started the feast. The next day we would be in the cars, we
had lots of food, little time, we had to start the consumption
process.  we all got extra rations of sausages, and Ramen.  After a
delicious lunch, we partially took down camp to save time the next
day.  It is important to note that our camp was beyond the minimalist
just tents camps.  The kitchen area was actually covered by a tarp
over a structure of PVC tubing (from sleds).

To pass time and reduce testerone poisoning, Robert suggested that we tough
guys sleep outside (to prove how tough we are or something like that). At
first I dismissed the idea, thinking he was bluffing.  An hour
later, as he and Mike were half way done with their snow alcoves, he
decided to take down the tent, as not to have the possibility or
temptation to cheat at night.  I thought this was very cool and
courageous (and would save us 15 minutes the next day).  Bill pointed
out to Robert that his grave hole with chambers on the side did not
constitute an snow cave.  These are the philosophical arguments that
one is bound to have in the woods.  I decided to follow on the task,
although my bourgeois background did not allow me to sleep in such
small confinement as Robert's and Mike's.  I took an extra 30 minutes,
and built a very spacious snow cave, even with plants (big branch of
pine tree sticking out); it was BIG, about 9 feet by 3 feet.  It is
important to note that a good small maneuverable shovel is key to
building a snow cave.  I think with practice one can be built quickly
an efficiently (Next year when we go to Katahdin, we might not bring
tents and save ourselves 14 pounds!, this is Robert's idea of winter
minimalism).  Bill, on the other hand, was not so eager (or rather was
eager to have his huge tent for himself).

Dinner came, and the feast continued.

Bed time came, and we all proceeded to our respective alcoves.  I was
slightly hesitant at first.  Mike had spoiled my confidence, by saying
what would happen if a moose walked over my snow cave (and mine was a
certified snow cave); it would crush me!!, I worried about that for 15
minutes, and then dismissed it by the fact that our polypro smelled so
bad that no moose would come near our campsite.  Now I will point out
the greatest advantage of snow caves!! you don't need a pee-bottle
(tm).  If you need to go to the candy-can, you simply unzip your bag,
roll to the side, and turn on the fountain.  The hole one the walls
are self-sealing, and hence you practice no-trace hiking which is
advocated.  I had a nice warm night of sleep.

DAY 5: The return

The day was going to be long, but just downhill, so we got out of bed
late.  I took on the task of being the morning's cook, the first batch
of Oatmeal was great.  Now I was discharged from the second batch
because I was a little behind in my packing.  Robert, after eating all
trip from dirty plates, the floor, the soles of boots, decided that he
did not want the second batch of oatmeal from a dirty pot.  Woman who
understands them, Oh wait...

After breakfast, the artful craft of sled packing continued.  This
time, the packing would be crucial, since we would be sledding the way
down from chimney pond to roaring brook.  First, we had to resort
group great, since food and fuel had been consumed.  Mike who carried
most of the food, got the short end of the stick, he got stuck with
all the bulky group gear items!.  I, having carried only
non-consumable items, had my pick of what to get rid off.  Robert, by
some magic or witful exchanges, was able to have the slimmest sled.
(I give him credit in the art of packing, it was really a masterpiece
of sled).  He had rigged his, as to be able to sit in the middle, very
close to the ground and ride it like a pony.  Mike and Bill managed
something similar albeit less professional.  I personally thought that
I had a good setup for sledding, but proved later to be wrong.

At 10:30 we departed and the fun began.  Robert "snowplow" Zeithammer
went first catching some high speeds; Bill and I followed, and Mike
joined few minutes later.  I unfortunately was very frustrated, my
high center of gravity made it extremely difficult to stay upright.  I
said to myself "Great, I am going to be the only fool that will walk
down this trail, all of my friends will have to wait for me".  To
further make my life more difficult, I found Bill's poles on the
trail.  After a quick radio exchange, Bill was way down, and I decided
to carry his poles which made my sled more difficult to maneuver.
After 15 minutes of fighting with my sled, I remembered that I was
wearing a helmet, and so I had not tried one thing: head-first
lugging!!, I got on top of that puppy, pushed it and lied on top of
it.. this made my center of gravity lower, and my aerodynamic profile
slimmer.  I was soon catching some serious wind (and of course winning
in the wipe out contests, at one point while falling into a powder
bank at high speeds, the spit me more than a body length from it);
fortunately (or unfortunately) I was alone (with a radio for safety
and Mike behind me), so no one would see it or record it.

We reached basin pond.  This is a beautiful flat pond that affords
some majestic views of the mountain.  We were all together again.
Robert queried me how his sled has 200 yards in front of us.  I
thinking of my wipe outs, replied "you were coming really really fast
and fell off the sled?", he corrected "no, I put a sail on it!!!".  I
was impressed, I think we have a plethora of wilderness-technologies,
that will make our next trip a breeze.  In another half an hour we
were down at Roaring Brook.  I cannot stress how fun is to be able
to sled 3.3 miles, 1500 feet elevation loss in 45-60 minutes (and I
have heard of people who have done better time...had I done my lugging
earlier...)

The sun was out in full strength.  The temperatures had risen to high
30's, low 40's.  Fortunately it was in the end of the trip.  Had it
been this warm earlier, I would have cancelled the trip (I mean is
suppose to be a winter hike).  Now we would have to master another
technique, skiing downhill with sleds.  The trick I learned is to keep
the legs slightly bent (otherwise the sled poles can push you from
behind), and push with your poles like an animal, if the sled passes
you, you lose.  We had some excellent displays of wipe out technique
from Mike and Bill, fortunately for them, they were too distant to be
caught by a camera.

The day proceeded with the "woosh-woosh" of the XC skis.  It was
better going, since there were a lot of downhills and the trail was
packed by the rangers.  We each proceeded at our own pace.  We took a
scenic-detour at Rum Pond.  This pond affords other complete views of
the mountain.  Although it does have some really steep sections of
skiing.  The day was made a litter more pleasant with Hot Tea provided
by mama Robert.  It is so nice to carry one of those on trips...

We reached the parking lot at 5:30pm.  And proceeded with the
expected: To pull Bill's truck out of the snow, luckily we had
shovels.  A dig here, dig there allowed us to move the truck a bit but
not too much.  Robert had the smart idea of fetching some dirt and
putting it on top of the snow, I must add that this works wonderfully.
(I think this is what Scott's usage of carrying kitty-litter in the
car is).  After 45 minutes of pushing and shoving we got the car out.

Being safe people (and the presence of Hector 'safety' Briceno) we
decided we would not head all the way to Boston that night.  Having
seen an Olive Garden in Bangor (Bangor mall exit, 51?), the dinning
place was agreed upon (I had been dreaming of salad and pasta all of the
hike back). We had a small discussion of the largest plate with the
waiter. There was the "Colors of Rome" with ravioli, chicken
parmesan and cannelloni al forno and then there was the "Tour of
Italy" with lightly breaded chicken parmesan, hearty homemade
lasagna classico and creamy fettuccine alfredo.  I went with the later
and was completely satisfied.  We slept in the Motor Inn across the
street; To pass time, we rented a movie called "Midnight Tease", I was
somewhat perplexed by the hotel attendant commenting that it was a
very bloody movie (that was not the comment I was expecting).  The
movie revealed Bill's cunning brain to break down and discover the plot
very quickly (could it be that he had seen it before?).  Bill also
discovered the ineffectiveness of soap as a substitute for shampoo.

The next day, we were greeted by a snow storm (great another long
drive back to Boston, I still have not figured out who of the other
three is the one who brings such storms...).  A breakfast stop at
Denny's provided some time to wait out the storm.  We had large
breakfasts: The Lumberjack, three pancakes, three eggs, sausages, ham,
and hash brown.  I finished all of mine (I will not say about the
others).  We also discovered Mike's resemblance to Meg Ryan (did you
see "When Harry met Sally"). He wanted his egg turn slowly over the
grill, not too fast, the hash browns in little small half-inch pieces,
sausages lightly brown (of course I am exaggerating a bit, but you get
the picture).  He also incriminated himself in the butter
disappearance crime, by accidentally revealing the fact that he does
not like butter that much.  Had we only known this before!!!.

The storm had ceased a bit, and we proceeded back to Boston.  We got
back at 4:45pm, to notice that no one was working the desk (and that
we would have to).  In the next two hours, we unpacked the sleds
sorted out gear, had pizza, and played cards (we never played cards in
the mountain, it is a myth that people do...).

I must say I really enjoyed the trip and the company, Katahdin is
really a photogenic and beautiful mountain, enhanced by the fact that
you have to work to get to it.

I would like to thank our sponsors, Luke Sosnowski and Matt Reagan for
procuring the TalkAbout (tm) radios; Rob Jagnow for participating in
Pemiwasset preparatory hike and in the planning process at Elvios;
Toys'r'us for provided the first version of the Turbo-boggans; Walmart
for providing the second generation sleds, the Pelica-boggans; The
park ranger and reservation attendant for the help and advice; Kraft
for providing the 12 sticks of butter (which we only used 7 or so);
And the MIT Outing club for giving us support and gear.

